ARTICLE 

Dynamic Multi-Level Heuristic Framework for Predicting Lung Cancer 
from CT Scan Data 

Nongmaithem Ajith Singh1,* and Rajkumar Palaniappan2 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, South East Manipur College, Komlatahabi, Chandel District, 
Manipur, India. 
2Associate Professor, Department of Mechatronics Engineering, University of Technology Bahrain, Bahrain. 
*Corresponding Author: Nongmaithem Ajith Singh. Email: ajithex@gmail.com  

Received: 26 July 2025; Accepted: 17 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Lung cancer is the abnormal growth of cells in the lung, causing a severe risk to human health 
because the lung has a connected network of blood vessels and lymphatic channels vulnerable to metastasis. 
Lung cancer is known to be one of the most dangerous diseases, which is the main reason for disease and death 
when diagnosed in primitive stages. Since lung cancer can only be detected more broadly after it spreads to the 
lung region and the occurrence of lung cancer in the earlier stage is very difficult to predict. It causes a greater 
risk as radiologists and specialist doctors assess the existence of lung cancer. The accuracy of detecting tumor 
shape, location, and volume plays a vital role in the successful diagnosis and treatment of tumors. For this 
reason, it is important to build a smart and automatic cancer prediction system that is accurate and at which 
stage of cancer, or improve the accuracy of the previous cancer prediction, which will help determine the type 
of treatment and treatment depth depending on the severity of the disease. Adaptive Hierarchical Heuristic 
Mathematical Model (AHIHMM) has been proposed for the deep learning approach. To analyze deep learning 
based on the historical therapy scheme in the development of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancers (NSCLC), automated 
radiation adaptation protocols for optimizing local tumor regulation at lower rates. Computed Tomography 
(CT) images are widely used for lung cancer detection as they provide information about different parts of the 
lung. Furthermore, the proposed system consists of three steps, including acquiring the image, preprocessing, 
segmentation, and classification. Firstly preprocessing stage, (i) Improved Median Filter (IMF) and Wiener 
Filter (WF) techniques are introduced for removing or reducing the noise from the image, (ii) Image histogram 
methods are used for image quality enhancement, Histogram Rehabilitated (HR) and Local Contrast 
Enhancement (LCE) techniques that consists of two stages of processing to increase the potentiality of contrast 
enhancement and to preserve the local details in the images, contrasted details to improve the quality of the CT 
pulmonary image, then (iii) resulted image passed to edge detection done using Canny Edge Detection (CED) 
algorithm. Secondly segmentation stage, the segmentation of the region injured by cancer by the use of the K-
means clustering algorithm, using the enhanced lung CT image. Segmentation of the lung CT image is carried 
out to extract any significant feature of a segmented image, and a specific feature extraction method is 
implemented. Finally, classification stage, identification of lung cancer through an explosion-trained Deep 
Learning Neural Network (DLNN). The image training should be carried out utilizing a deep-learning NN before 
the classification process is done. The experimental results show that metrics such as accuracy and Efficiency 
Ratio. The experimental results have been demonstrated with the help of a dataset downloaded from online. 
The experiment result shows that the proposed AHIHMM achieves the highest accuracy compared with the 
other modern methods, such as Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) and Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN). 

KEYWORDS: Lung Cancer, CT Scan, Deep Learning, Image Segmentation, Neural Network, Medical Imaging.





2 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

KEYWORDS: Adaptive HIerarchical Heuristic Mathematical Model (AHIHMM), Lung Cancer Prediction (LCP), 
Computed Tomography (CT), Improved Median Filter (IMF), Deep Learning Neural Network (DLNN). 
 

1 Introduction 
Cancer is one of the leading causes of death worldwide. It has caused more deaths than any other 

disease, such as tuberculosis or malaria. World Health Organization (WHO) agencies for cancer 
research (i.e, International Agency for Cancer Research (IACR) and American Cancer Society) report 
that 17.1 million new cancer cases were recorded in 2018 worldwide [1]. WHO estimates that cancer 
incidences might increase to 27.5 million by 2040, with an estimated 16.3 million deaths expected as 
a result of cancer [1].  

A malignant tumor labeled by uncontrolled cell growth in lung tissues is lung cancer, known as 
lung carcinoma. This must be treated so that its growth is not spread to other parts of the body, 
resulting in metastases. Carcinoma is the majority of cancers starting in the lung. The two main types 
are carcinoma of small cells of the lung and non-small cells of the lung. The primary factor in 88% of 
lung cancers is long-term smoking. Approximately 15-20 % of cases occur in humans who have not 
smoked except for asthma, smoking, asbestos, and radon gas [2]. 

Lung cancer arises when cells in the lung grow uncontrollably, forming a tumor lesion or nodule. 
The reasons behind lung cancer are smoking, air pollution, harmful chemicals, etc. Based on the 
cancer type, stage, and molecular characteristics, treatment includes surgery, radiation therapy, 
chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapy. Computed Tomography (CT) scan is one of 
the widely used medical imaging technologies that presents useful information for various medical 
and clinical diagnoses. Practical manual segmentation from CT images used to measure the volume 
of lung tumors, which is operator-dependent and time-consuming [3].  

The first and fundamental step for lung image analysis is the segmentation of the lung. 
Segmentation is the process by which regions of interest of a digital image are portioned and labeled 
in different segments using properties such as intensity, texture, etc., which is much easier to analyze. 
Errors in lung segmentation would generate false information, so accurate segmentation is 
necessary. The segmentation of lung tumors is very heuristic in nature as the CT images include 
bones, bronchioles, trachea, soft tissues, and background artifacts, which share properties of 
intensity, connectivity with tumor lesions [4]. 

A CT scan combines a series of X-ray images taken from different angles and uses computer 
processing to create cross-sectional image slices of the bones, blood vessels, and soft tissues. Special 
x-ray equipment is used for a CT scan of the chest to examine abnormalities in the lung [5]. 

The traditional method to predict the presence of lung cancer is CT and X-rays. Biopsy, which is 
usually performed with a bronchoscope or a CT scan, confirms the diagnosis. The impact of death due 
to cancer in men is due primarily to lung cancer, and a new and comprehensive approach to the early 
diagnosis of lung cancer should, therefore, be established [6]. The method of image recognition has 
been enhanced by recent technology in deep learning or Deep Neural Networks (DNN). Scan the 
pattern in an image utilizing DNN and decide if it recognizes the pattern. Besides, it looks for several 
patterns when analyzing an image. Neural network training requires a predetermined dataset to be 
used by the network to recognize, learn, and classify a picture. DNN has become more and more 
common because it can easily be used for recognizing image patterns and classifying images [7]. Most 
of the patients with Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) are ineligible because of locally improved 
diseases or remote metastases and therefore radiation treatment.  



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 3 
 

In the proposed work, DNN can be used in various medical fields to extract features and classify 
images. The DNN model has been trained and tested using functional CT data. The images have been 
divided into one convolutional layer only. It is difficult to classify heavier images with DNN. While 
images of the form CT are used primarily in medical imaging, unnecessary artifacts can be created. 
The threshold has been used to prevent the images from displaying these objects. The threshold 
procedure eliminates unwanted peaks in pixels of the medical image of lung cancer. The main 
contributions of the proposed work steps are: 

• Pre-processing stage, IMF and WF techniques are introduced for removing or reducing the 
noise from the image, HR and LCE techniques to increase the potentiality of contrast enhancement 
and to preserve the local details in the images, contrasted details to improve the quality of the CT 
pulmonary image, and then edge detection is done using the CED algorithm. 

• Adaptive HIerarchical Heuristic Mathematical Model (AHIHMM) to predict lung cancer 
based on Deep learning using CT images. 

• DNN framework to extract high-level features directly from the information and apply the 
K-means clustering algorithm. 

• The experimental results have been performed to enhance the accuracy in prediction, and 
the dataset http://diagnijmegen.nl/index.php/Lung_Cancer has been utilized. 

 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The Literature review on LCP existing schemes is 
briefly discussed in section 2. The proposed methodology for the LCP system using a deep learning 
algorithm is presented in section 3. The results and discussion are briefly explained in section 4. The 
conclusion is described in section 5. 

2 Literature Review 
Coudray et al [8] developed a Deep Convolutional Neural Network (inception v3) on whole-slide 

images obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas to accurately and automatically classify them into 
LUAD, LUSC, or normal lung tissue. The performance of the method is comparable to that of 
pathologists, with an average Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.97. The proposed model was validated 
on independent datasets of frozen tissues, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues, and biopsies. 
Furthermore, trained the network to predict the ten most commonly mutated genes in LUAD. Also, 
found that six of them-STK11, EGFR, FAT1, SETBP1, KRAS, and TP53-can be predicted from pathology 
images, with AUCs from 0.733 to 0.856 as measured on a held-out population. These findings suggest 
that deep-learning models can assist pathologists in the detection of cancer subtypes or gene 
mutations. 

Wang et al [9] proposed a Support Vector Machine (SVM) for the prediction of malignant and 
benign lung tumors. The early diagnosis of lung cancer plays a very important role in therapeutic 
regimen selection. However, lung cancers are spatially and temporally heterogeneous; this limits the 
use of invasive biopsy. But radiomics, which refers to the comprehensive quantification of tumour 
phenotypes by applying a large number of quantitative image features, can capture intra-tumoral 
heterogeneity in a non-invasive way. Here, carry out a radiomic analysis of 150 features quantifying 
lung tumour image intensity, shape, and texture. These features are extracted from 593 patients' 
Computed Tomography (CT) data on the Lung Image Database Consortium Image Database Resource 
Initiative (LIDC-IDRI) dataset. By using SVM, we find that a large number of quantitative radiomic 
features have diagnostic power. The accuracy of the prediction of malignant lung tumors is 86% in 
the training set and 76.1% in the testing set. As CT imaging of lung tumors is widely used in routine 
clinical practice, a radiomic classifier will be a valuable tool that can help clinical doctors diagnose 
lung cancer. 



4 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

Jakimovski and Davcev [10] introduced a double Convolutional Deep Neural Network (CDNN) 
for lung cancer stage detection in Computed Tomography (CT) images. CT scans to train a CDNN and 
a regular CDNN. These topologies were tested against lung cancer images to determine the Tx cancer 
stage at which these topologies can detect the possibility of lung cancer. The first step was to pre-
classify the CT images from the initial dataset so that the training of the CDNN could be focused. Next, 
built the double CDNN with max pooling to perform a more thorough search. Finally, used CT scans 
of different Tx cancer stages of lung cancer to determine the Tx stage in which the CDNN would detect 
the possibility of lung cancer. Then tested the regular CDNN against the double CDNN. Using this 
algorithm, doctors will have additional help in early lung cancer detection and early treatment. After 
extensive training with 100 epochs, the double CDNN obtained the highest accuracy, whereas the 
regular CDNN obtained only lower accuracy. 

Teramoto et al [11] introduced a Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) for an automated 
classification scheme of lung cancers. An automated classification scheme for lung cancers presented 
in microscopic images using a DCNN, which is a major deep learning technique. DCNN used for 
classification consists of three convolutional layers, three pooling layers, and two fully connected 
layers. In evaluation experiments conducted, the DCNN was trained using the original database with 
a graphics processing unit. Microscopic images were first cropped and resampled to obtain images 
with a resolution of 256×256 pixels and, to prevent overfitting, collected images were augmented via 
rotation, flipping, and filtering. The probabilities of three types of cancers were estimated using the 
developed scheme, and their classification accuracy was evaluated using threefold cross-validation. 
In the results obtained, approximately 71% of the images were classified correctly, which is on par 
with the accuracy of cytotechnologists and pathologists. Thus, the developed scheme is useful for the 
classification of lung cancers from microscopic images. 

Yu et al [12] developed an Adaptive HIerarchical Heuristic Mathematical Model (AHIHMM) for 
lung cancer prediction. To analyze deep learning based on the historical therapy scheme in the 
development of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancers (NSCLC), automated radiation adaptation protocols 
that aim at optimizing local tumor regulation at lower rates of grade 2 RP2 radiation pneumonitis. 
Furthermore, the system proposed consists of several steps, including acquiring the image, 
preprocessing, binarization, thresholding, and segmentation, extraction of features, and detection of 
a Deep Neural Network (DNN). Segmentation of the lung CT image is carried out to extract any 
significant feature of a segmented image, and a specific feature extraction method is implemented. 
The test evaluation showed that the model proposed could detect the highest accuracy of the absence 
or presence of lung cancer. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
AHIHMM has been proposed for the deep learning approach. CT images are widely used for lung 

cancer detection as they provide information about different parts of the lung. Furthermore, the 
proposed system consists of three steps, including acquiring the image, preprocessing, segmentation, 
and classification. Firstly preprocessing stage, (i) IMF and WF techniques are introduced for 
removing or reducing the noise from the image, resulted while keeping its features intact for better 
understanding and recognition (ii) Image histogram methods are HR and LCE techniques that 
consists of two stages of processing to increase the potentiality of contrast enhancement and to 
preserve the local details in the images, contrasted details to improve the quality of the CT pulmonary 
image, resulted image improve quality enhancement (iii) resulted image passed to edge detection 
done using CED algorithm, the most useful image technique to improve quality of the image analysis 
process, result in the blurring of fine-scaled image edges. Secondly segmentation stage, the 
segmentation of the region injured by cancer by the use of the K-means clustering algorithm, using 
the enhanced lung CT image. Segmentation of the lung CT image is carried out to extract any 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 5 
 

significant feature of a segmented image, and a specific feature extraction method is implemented. 
Finally, classification stage, identification of lung cancer through an explosion-trained DLNN. The 
image training should be carried out utilizing a deep-learning NN before the classification process is 
done. 

In a wide variable list, the Bayesian network technique has been used for graph theory to define 
the radiotherapy environment that allows the hierarchical links between variables and interesting 
results to be recognized. The method used is based on the identification from a high-dimensional 
data set of separate extended Markov blankets (MBs) for RP2 and LC. 

Case 1: Deep Neural Network (DNN) Let's consider the data {𝑦𝑗}with labels {𝑧𝑗}such that 𝜒 =
{(𝑦𝑗, 𝑥𝑗)|𝑦𝑗𝜖ℜ𝑚, 𝑧𝑗 ∈ ℜ𝑛, 𝑗 = 1, … 𝑀, a DNN determines a function 𝑓𝐷𝑁𝑁: ℜ𝑚 → ℜ𝑛 to weave via 
data such that 𝑓𝐷𝑁𝑁(𝑦𝑗) ≅ 𝑧𝑗 as much as possible through the utility of 3 different parts: Neurons 
𝑥𝑗 ∈ ℜ, layers of l neurons 𝑥 = (𝑥1, . . , 𝑥𝑙) and activation function 𝜌, if a deep neural network has 
layers 𝑖 = 0, … 𝑘, each of which has mi neurons, then 𝑖 = 0 and 𝑘 would indicate the initial input 
and last output layer, respectively. An activation function 𝜌: ℜ𝑚𝑖−1 → ℜ𝑚𝑖  links the neurons of (i-
1)th layer 𝑥(𝑖−1) ∈ ℜ𝑚𝑖−1  would satisfy: 

x(i) = ρ(Θ(i−1). 𝑥(𝑖−1) + 𝑎(𝑖−1))    (1) 

 

A typical option of 𝜌 is a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) or sigmoid. Where Θ(i−1) ∈ ℜ𝑚𝑖×𝑚𝑖−1 and 
𝑎(𝑖−1) ∈ ℜ𝑚𝑖−1  denotes the unknown weights and bias to be calculated. 

3.1 Image-Preprocessing 
Medical image processing methods have been used to predict changes present in the lungs of the 

recorded CT pulmonary images. The lung cancer processing structure is shown in Figure 1. A lung 
tumor has been successfully detected by the medical image processing technique according to the 
processing structure of the lung picture. Image de-noising is an asset for image noise processing, 
which includes filtering techniques that include different ways to de-noise an image. Accordingly, 
noises are spotted with neighboring information and are removed using the best filtering techniques 
without affecting the image quality, and reinforce the smoothness of the image taken for examination. 
Image preprocessing is important to remove the noise and to enhance the quality of the image. IMF 
is used to remove the salt and pepper noise, and WF is useful to remove speckle noise. HR and LCE 
algorithms are used to increase the contrast of the image. 

3.1.1 Median Filter (MF) 
MF is a very popular technique for the removal of impulse noise because it runs through the 

signal cell by cell and replaces the value of each cell with the neighboring by median of the intensity 
levels of its mathematical accuracy. Due to this tendency of MF, the good pixel cells are replaced by 
the corrupted ones. Therefore, de-noising often leads to the removal of fine details present in an 
image because it is done at the cost of distorted and blurred features possessed by this filtering 
technique. The noisy value of the digital image or the sequence is replaced by the median value of the 
neighborhood (mask). The median filtering output is g(x, y) = med{ f (x − i, y − j), i, j ∈ W} where 
f (x, y), g(x, y)are the original image and the output image respectively, W is the two-dimensional 
mask: the mask size is n × n (where n is commonly odd) such as  3 × 3, 5 × 5, etc.; the mask shape 
may be linear, square, circular, cross, etc. Because the median filter is nonlinear, its mathematical 
analysis is relatively complex for an image with random noise. 



6 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

 
Figure 1: The Architecture of the Proposed AHIHMM Method 

For an image with zero mean noise under a normal distribution, the noise variance of the median 
filtering is approximately [13]. 

𝜎2 1 𝜎2 𝜋
𝑚𝑒 = ≈ 𝑖

𝑑 𝜋 .   
4𝑛𝑓2  

(𝑛̅) 𝑛+ −1 2∙∙  (2) 
2

where 𝜎2
𝑖  is input noise power (the variance), n is the size of the median filtering mask, 𝑓  (𝑛̅) 

is the function of the noise density. And the noise variance of the average filtering is, 

𝜎2 1
0 = 𝜎2   3  

𝑛 𝑖..  ( )

The median filtering performance of random noise reduction is better than the average filtering 
performance, but for the impulse noise, especially when narrow pulses are farther apart, and the 

𝑛
pulse width is less than , the median filter is very effective. The median filter's noise-reducing 

2
effects depend on the size and shape of the filtering mask, and its algorithm complexity mainly 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 7 
 

depends on how to get the median value. In order to improve the noise-reducing performance of the 
median filter, improved methods for the Improved Median Filter (IFM) are proposed. 

3.1.2 Improved Median Filtering (IFM) 
The filtering mask is mainly an n × n square mask or a cross mask. The smaller the mask is, the 

better the image details are retained, the weaker the noise reduction performance is; the larger the 
mask is, the less the image details are retained, the stronger the noise reduction performance. In the 
filtering process, it can adaptively resize the mask according to the noise levels of the mask. In the 
mask, 𝑚𝑎𝑥  is the maximum value of gray levels, 𝑚𝑖𝑛  is the minimum value of gray 
levels, 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 is the average value of gray levels, 𝑚𝑒𝑑 is the median value of gray levels, 𝑓(𝑖, 𝑗) 
is the central value of the mask, 𝑛 is the size of the mask. The adaptive filtering requires two steps: 

Step 1: adaptively resizing the mask 
 Initialization: let 𝑛 = 3; 
 Computation: 𝐴1 = 𝑚𝑒𝑑 − 𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝐴2 = 𝑚𝑒𝑑 − 𝑚𝑎𝑥 
 Judgment: if 𝐴1 > 0 and 2 < 0, then turn to step 2; if not, then enlarge the size of the mask, 

let 𝑛 = 𝑛 + 2. 
Step 2: median filtering. 
The average filter has better performance for filtering random noise. Combining the median 

filter with the average filter for a certain size of the filtering mask. For the natural image, neighboring 
pixels have a strong correlation. The gray value of each pixel is quite close to neighboring pixels, and 
the edge pixels also have the same property. In the reducing-noise process, sequentially check each 
pixel. If the value of a pixel is greater than the average value in the mask, then judge that the pixel is 
contaminated by the noise and replace it with the median value of the mask; otherwise, retain the 
original value of the pixel unchanged. This forms an iterative process; it not only decreases the time 
complexity but also improves the noise-reducing effect. 

3.1.3 Weiner Filter (WF) 
The Weiner Filter (WF) is used to filter out the noise present in an image that possesses a 

corrupted signal in it. This filtering technique uses a statistical approach to filter the noise from each 
pixel of an image. WF is a technique that performs optimal trading involving opposite filtering and 
noise smoothing. It removes the blurring and additional noise present in the image, and it is also very 
optimal in relation to the mean squared error, where it minimizes the overall Mean Square Error in 
the operation of the filtering technique for noise removal. WF is usually defined by the following [14]: 

• Hypothesis: additive noise and image signal are inactive linear random processes 
containing spectral characteristics.  

• Necessity: The filter must be able to achieve and be accessed. 
Performance criteria: It depends on the minimum Mean Squared Error. 

3.1.4 Contrast Enhancement 
Histogram Equalization (HE) uniformly distributes the output histogram by using the cumulated 

histogram as its mapping function. HE has large backward difference values of mapping functions, 
and the contrast enhancement potential should be enriched without losing the fine details in the CT 
image. It is important to note that when the input histogram distribution is already uniform, the 
mapping obtained from cumulating the distribution is 𝐶(𝑟𝑘)  = 𝑟𝑘 , 𝑟𝑘 is the kth gray level in the 
image that identically maps input to output [15]. 



8 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

Histogram Rehabilitation (HR): The main objective of this method is to find a rehabilitated 
histogram 𝑟̅̅𝑔̅ that is closer to a uniform histogram, and to make the difference between (𝑟̅̅𝑔̅ − ℎ𝑔𝑖) 
rehabilitated and input histogram small, which in turn increases the potential of image contrast 
enhancement, and the resultant image would be more relevant to the input image. The optimization 
problem for the lower sub image can be defined as 

min‖𝑟̅̅𝑔̅ − ℎ𝑔𝑖‖ + 𝜍1‖̅̅𝑟𝑔̅ − 𝑢𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟‖    (4) 

The rehabilitated histogram for the lower sub image can be obtained by finding an analytical 
solution as follows: 

(𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 − ℎ𝑔𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟) + 𝜍1𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 − 𝜍1𝑢𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 = 0    (5) 

where 𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑔𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, 𝑢𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, and 𝜍1 are the rehabilitated histogram, input histogram, 
uniform histogram, and the contrast enhancement parameter for the lower sub histogram, 
respectively. 

Then, the bicriteria optimization problem for the upper sub image can be written as, 

min‖𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 − ℎ𝑔𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟‖ + 𝜍2‖𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 − 𝑢𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟‖    (6) 

 
The rehabilitated histogram for upper sub image can be obtained by finding an analytical 

solution as follows: 

(𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 − ℎ𝑔𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟) + 𝜍1𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 − 𝜍2𝑢𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 = 0    (7) 

where 𝑟̅̅𝑔̅𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑔𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 , 𝑢𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟, and 𝜍2 are the rehabilitated histogram, input histogram, 
uniform histogram, and the contrast enhancement parameter for the lower sub histogram, 
respectively. 

𝑢𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, 𝑢𝑖𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 ∈ 𝑢𝑖∀  𝑢 256×1
𝑖 ∈ 𝑅     (8) 

Local Contrast Enhancement (LCE): Although the global approach for image contrast 
enhancement is suitable for some cases. The number of pixels in this area may have a negligible 
influence on the computation of the global transformation. The histogram modification process is the 
first step in the given CT image, and then the local contrast enhancement method is applied to 
histogram histogram-rehabilitated image. Let 𝕕𝑟 denote a discrete random variable representing 
discrete gray levels in the range [0, L−1] and let 𝑃(𝕕𝑟𝑖) is the normalized histogram component 
corresponding to the 𝑖th value of 𝕕𝑟. The 𝑛th moment of 𝕕𝑟 about its multipeak mean (𝔪𝜇) for 
the purpose of enhancing the contrast as well as preserving essential details for any given gray scale 
and colour images.is defined as, 

𝑃(𝕕𝑟 𝑛
𝔪𝜇𝑛(𝕕𝑟) = ∑𝐿−1 (𝕕𝑟 𝑖)

𝑖=0 𝑖 − ∑𝑁𝑃
𝑖=0 ) 𝑃(𝕕𝑟𝑖)    (9) 

𝑁𝑃

The local contrast enhancement for the CT image is obtained by applying the following equation 
after the histogram-rehabilitated image is obtained. 

𝐸. 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑖𝑓 𝔪𝜇𝑥,𝑦 ≤ 𝐾0𝑀 
𝑔(𝑥, 𝑦) = {     (10) 

𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒

where 𝑔(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦)  are final enhanced and histogram rehabilitated images, 
respectively, E, and 𝐾0 <  1 are specified parameters. 𝑀 is the global multipeak mean of the input 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 9 
 

image applied to the LCE method. These two parameters afford a simple yet powerful local contrast 
enhancement by varying the enhancement parameter in the histogram modification process. 

3.1.5 Canny Edge Detection (CED) 
Edge detection is a fundamental tool in image processing, machine vision, and computer vision, 

particularly in the areas of feature detection and feature extraction. CED is a technique to extract 
useful structural information from different vision objects and dramatically reduces the amount of 
data to be processed. Canny has found that the requirements for the application of edge detection on 
diverse vision systems are relatively similar [16]. The general criteria for edge detection include: 

1. Detection of edges with a low error rate, which means that the detection should accurately 
catch as many edges shown in the image as possible. 

2. The edge point detected by the operator should accurately localize on the center of the 
edge. 

3. A given edge in the image should only be marked once, and where possible, image noise 
should not create false edges. 

The Canny algorithm, as the first step, applies the LoG filter, which emphasizes the region of 
fastest intensity change. LoG value is used to decompose the original image into two images. After 
applying the LoG filter follows the usual steps: image smoothing and filtering, finding the gradient 
magnitude and gradient direction, non-maxima suppression, and edge tracking by hysteresis [17]. 

Process of the CED Algorithm 
The process of the CED algorithm can be broken down into 5 different steps: 
1. Apply the LoG filter to smooth the image  
2. Find the intensity gradients of the image 
3. Apply non-maximum suppression to get rid of the spurious response to edge detection 
4. Apply a double threshold to determine potential edges 
5. Detection of edges by suppressing all the other edges that are weak and not connected to 

strong edges. 

3.3 Image-Segmentation 
Segmentation of the region injured by cancer by the use of the K-means clustering algorithm 

using the enhanced lung CT image. The implemented segmentation approach inspects the pixel 
similarity in the lung CT images and divides the images into several sub-settings to predict the area 
of concern. The pixel or information is subsequently tested during the image fragmentation process 
to predict the comparability of data using the same value of spectrum or pixels. The pixel similarity 
attribute involves the quantitative image evaluation used to accurately shape the cluster. A modified 
K-means clustering algorithm has been proposed. In the data of lung cancer modified K-means 
clustering algorithm has been utilized, and the datasets have been divided into two groups of 
clusters: one cluster of lung cancer patients and the other for cancer-free patients. Based on the value 
of the attributes, the number of clusters is determined. Two clusters are formed based on these 
plotted points and two centroid points. The effect of the new attributes on the cluster is described as 
if the next attribute is smoking, the cluster moves to either left or right to a certain distance, 
depending on the cluster's impact. K-means clustering is a data-partitioning algorithm that iteratively 
assigns n observations to exactly one of the k clusters defined by centroids, where k is chosen before 
the algorithm starts. 

Let 𝑋 = {𝑥1, 𝑥2, … . , 𝑥𝑛} be the set of n data points and 𝐶 = {𝑐1, 𝑐2, … . , 𝑐𝑛} be the set of m 
cluster centers. The 𝑛 data points are to be clustered into 𝑚 cluster centers. 



10 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

𝐽 = ∑𝑚 ∑𝑛 2
𝑖=1 𝑗=1‖𝑥𝑖 − 𝑐𝑗‖     (11) 

Where 𝑘 = number of clusters, 𝑛 = total number of data, 𝑐𝑗 = 𝑗𝑡ℎ cluster center and 𝑥𝑖 =
𝑖𝑡ℎ data point. The optimal centers are obtained by minimizing this objective function. 

3.4 Image-Classification 
The identification of lung cancer through an explosion-trained Deep Learning Neural Network 

(DLNN). The image training should be carried out utilizing a deep-learning NN before the 
classification process is done, since it does not need manual features. Alternatively, the deep learning 
process uses a captured segmented image or lung CT image that utilizes a huge number of hidden 
layers to identify the boundaries of the image and the corresponding features utilized for the 
network's creation, with a large amount of information. 

Case 2: Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) have been utilized to synthesize more radiotherapy-
like information, to mitigate the issue of small sample size in datasets when modeling difficult state 
transitions in the circumstances of radiation. A GAN contains two neural networks, one generative 
(H). The other is biased (E), which seeks to test the (dis)-similarity of the condensed data against the 
actual data. In general, H is designed to generate inextricable data to confuse E, while E tries to 
differentiate between the data produced by H or not. The adversary E and H character are generated 
using the loss function of the mini-max two players: 

min max 𝐿(𝐻, 𝐸) = min max 𝐺𝑦~𝑄 [log 𝐸(𝑦)] + 𝐺 [log (1 − 𝐸(𝐻 ))]    
𝐻 𝐸 𝐻 𝐸 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎(𝑦) 𝑥~𝑄𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟(𝑥) (𝑥) (12) 

3.4.1 Deep Q Networks 
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), there is a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and an agent. RL has 

been utilized to mimic how doctors decide on the dose fraction tradeoff required to dictate to a 
patient. Over a decision made by the present state 𝜋: 𝑊 → 𝐵 an agent acquires respective reward T 
and gets reinforced to the next state. An agent taking care of supplying tasks 𝑏 ∈ 𝐵 in a condition, 
which is explained by the different states 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊  in the conditions. A second opinion or the 
presence of a specialist in the setting would be an external agent. In the next phase of a dose-
escalation radiotherapy therapy course, the required dose per fraction (adaptation) will be 
determined. 

𝑃𝜋(𝑤, 𝑏) = 𝐺[∑∞ 𝛿𝑘
𝑙=1 𝑇(𝑤𝑙 , 𝜋(𝑤𝑙))| 𝜋, 𝑤0 = 𝑤, 𝑏0 = 𝑏]    (13) 

The convergence meets at the single fixed point as 𝑗 → ∞ based on the contraction mapping 
theorem, 

𝑃̃∗(𝑤, 𝑏) = 𝐺𝑟~𝑄 [𝑇(𝑤, 𝑏) + 𝛿 max 𝑃̃∗(𝑟, 𝑎)]   
𝑤𝑏  (14) 

𝑎∈𝐵

Case 3: Radiotherapy Dose Adaptation is a key objective of has to determine whether it can 
potentially use reinforcement learning to regenerate previously made established decisions before 
attempting to use Deep Reinforcement Learning for autonomous decision-making. A therapy has 
total fractions 𝑓(𝑟) fraction/dose 𝑏(𝑟) as a function of time r with V: 

𝑏0, 0 ≤ 𝑟 ≤ 𝑟
𝑓(𝑟∗) = 𝑓0, 𝑓(𝑅) = 30, 𝑏(𝑟) = { ∗    (15) 

𝑏1, 𝑟∗ ≤ 𝑟 ≤ 𝑅

The rest of the dose is given for the target, depending on the avid mid-therapy defined through 
the Metabolic Tumor Volume (MTV). Firstly, local discovery algorithms based on constraints using 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 11 
 

the Markov blankets have been used to select high-dimensional (297 candidates) variables that relate 
mostly to RP2/LC. Then, to build a single Bayesian network from the attributes chosen for both the 
RP2 and the LC, with graphic learning algorithms. Finally, cross-validation has been used for 
determining and assessing nodes in a Bayesian Network with the highest Area Under Curve value of 
joint prediction for LC and RP2. This procedure resulted in 9 selected features, including SNPs, 
cytokines, PET, and miRNA, which have been deemed to reflect the state variables as important 
predictors. 

Deep Neural Network structure and weights Θ that should be finetuned for the best estimation 
of the actual Q-function: 

𝑃(𝑤, 𝑏1)

𝑃Θ
DN ∶ W → T|B| 𝑏𝑦𝑃Θ 𝑃(𝑤, 𝑏2)

N DNN(𝑤) = ( )     (16) 
⋮

𝑃(𝑤, 𝑏𝑙)

4 Results and Discussion 
The findings of segmentation included nodules connecting to the inner wall and precise 

segmentation of the lung parenchyma. In the classification and detection of objects, efficient 
segmentation is very important. An efficient method of segmentation is developed based on the 
distribution of lung CT images by spatial pixel intensity. CT images will simply remove pulmonary 
parenchyma in morphological operations; however, tissue around the lung can be included. The 
experimental results have been performed to enhance the accuracy in prediction and the dataset 
http://diagnijmegen.nl/index.php/Lung_Cancer has been utilized. The experimental results show 
that metrics such as accuracy and Efficiency Ratio. The experiment result shows that the proposed 
AHIHMM compares with the other modern methods, such as DCNN and ANN. 

4.1 Accuracy 
Accuracy in low-dose CT images, and the same approaches are recommended for separating the 

lungs into high-resolution CT images. The measured value is compared with the extracted and trained 
features for cancer classification based on deep learning. Double-time matching enhances the accuracy 
of prediction and decreases the failure rate efficiently. The mean accuracy of the classifier specifies how 
many samples have been correctly predicted by the total number of samples. 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = ∗ 100    (17) 

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑛𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

4.2 Efficiency Ratio 
The efficiency of the proposed AHIHMM method was evaluated in various aspects of recognition 

rate, misclassification ratio. The high number of CT data has enabled us to use a moderate mini-batch 
size and to regulate training processes to achieve adequate speed and efficiency. In general, manual 
inspection is difficult to identify these quantitative image features, computerized methods can 
efficiently identify those features, and our classifiers can be used effectively in routine practices. 

Table 1: Performance comparison metrics vs. LCP classification methods. 

Methods Metrics 

Accuracy (%) Efficiency Ratio (%) 

DCNN 97.8 92.7 



12 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

ANN 98.2 95.3 

AHIHMM 99.5 97.5 

 

100

99.5

99

98.5
DCNN

98
ANN

97.5

97 AHIHMM

96.5
DCNN ANN AHIHMM

Methods
 

Figure 2: Accuracy results evaluation of LCP classification methods 

The accuracy results comparison of the three classification methods is shown in Figure 2. The 
results disclose that the proposed AHIHMM classifier provides higher accuracy results of 99.5%, 
whereas other existing methods, such as DCNN and ANN, give 97.8% and 98.2% respectively. 

 
98
97
96
95
94

DCNN
93
92 ANN
91 AHIHMM
90

DCNN ANN AHIHMM

Methods
 

Figure 3: Efficiency ratio results evaluation of LCP classification methods 

Figure 3 shows the efficiency ratio comparison results of the three classification methods. Those 
methods are DCNN, ANN, and AHIHMM. The results disclose that the proposed AHIHMM classifier 
provides a higher efficiency ratio of 97.5%, whereas other existing methods, such as DCNN, ANN, give 
of 92.7% and 95.3% respectively. 

5 Conclusion 
Deep learning assisted AHIHMM to predict lung cancer on CT images, preprocessing stage, IMF 

and WF for removing or reducing the noise from the image, HR and LCE techniques to increase the 
potentiality of contrast enhancement and to preserve the local details in the images for improve the 
quality, then uses Modified K-means algorithm to pre-classify pictures into slices of images in the 
same image, where the DNN will concentrate on the image classification of images in similar images. 

Efficiency Ratio (%)
Accuracy (%)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 13 
 

The next thing is the convolution layer with filtered edges to scan for lung cancer thoroughly. Then, 
estimating the weighted mean function, which replaces the pixel utilizing the cumulative distribution 
and likelihood distribution method, improved the image's quality. The injured portion has been 
segmented by a pixel-like value measurement after the image has been improved. Based on the 
similarity calculation, spectrally related features have been extracted. The AHIHMM system predicts 
computed tomography scanning images of lung cancer successfully. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: Nongmaithem Ajith Singh; supervision and 
writing—review and editing: Rajkumar Palaniappan. All authors reviewed the results and approved 
the final version of the manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. American Cancer Society.  Global Cancer: Facts & Figures, 4th edition http://www.cancer.org/content/ 

dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/global-cancer-facts-and-figures/global-cancer-
facts-and -figures-4th-edition.pdf, 2018. 

2. Xie H, Yang D, Sun N, Chen Z, Zhang Y. Automated pulmonary nodule detection in CT images using deep 
convolutional neural networks. Pattern Recognit. 2019;85:109-19. 

3. Ait Skourt B, El Hassani A, Majda A. Lung CT image segmentation using deep neural networks. Procedia 
Comput Sci. 2018;127:109-13. 

4. Mansoor A, Bagci U, Foster B, Xu Z, Papadakis GZ, Folio LR, Udupa JK, Mollura DJ. Segmentation and image 
analysis of abnormal lungs at CT: current approaches, challenges, and future trends. Radiographics. 
2015;35(4):1056-76. 

5. Huang X, Sun W, Tseng TL, Li C, Qian W. Fast and fully-automated detection and segmentation of 
pulmonary nodules in thoracic CT scans using deep convolutional neural networks. Comput Med Imaging 
Graph. 2019;74:25-36. 

6. Wang X, Liu H, Shen Y, Li W, Chen Y, Wang H. Low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) versus other cancer 
screenings in early diagnosis of lung cancer: A meta-analysis. Medicine. 2018;97(27):e11233. 

7. Shakeel PM, Burhanuddin MA, Desa MI. Automatic lung cancer detection from CT image using improved 
deep neural network and ensemble classifier. Neural Comput Appl. 2022;34(12):9579-92. 

8. Coudray N, Ocampo PS, Sakellaropoulos T, Narula N, Snuderl M, Fenyö D, Moreira AL, Razavian N, Tsirigos 
A. Classification and mutation prediction from non–small cell lung cancer histopathology images using 
deep learning. Nat Med. 2018;24(10):1559-67. 

9. Wang J, Liu X, Dong D, Song J, Xu M, Zang Y, Tian J. Prediction of malignant and benign of lung tumor using 
a quantitative radiomic method. In 2016 38th Annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in 
medicine and biology society (EMBC); 2016 Aug 16, Orlando, FL, USA; 2016. p. 1272-1275. 

10. Jakimovski G, Davcev D. Using double convolution neural network for lung cancer stage detection. Appl 
Sci. 2019;9(3):427. 

11. Teramoto A, Tsukamoto T, Kiriyama Y, Fujita H. Automated classification of lung cancer types from 
cytological images using deep convolutional neural networks. BioMed Res Int. 2017;2017(1):4067832. 

12. Yu H, Zhou Z, Wang Q. Deep learning assisted predict of lung cancer on computed tomography images 
using the adaptive hierarchical heuristic mathematical model. IEEE Access. 2020;8:86400-10. 

13. Öztürk Ş, Akdemir B. HIC-net: A deep convolutional neural network model for classification of 
histopathological breast images. Comput Electr Eng. 2019;76:299-310. 

14. Baselice F, Ferraioli G, Ambrosanio M, Pascazio V, Schirinzi G. Enhanced Wiener filter for ultrasound image 
restoration. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2018;153:71-81. 



14 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):1 
 

15. Mohan S, Ravishankar M. Modified contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization based on local 
contrast enhancement for mammogram images. In International conference on advances in information 
technology and mobile communication; 2012 Apr 27, 2012. p. 397-403. 

16. Wahdan P, Saad A, Shoukry A. Automated breast tumour detection in ultrasound images using support 
vector machine and ensemble classification. J Biomed Eng Biosci. 2016;3:4-11. 

17. Stosic Z, Rutesic P. An improved canny edge detection algorithm for detecting brain tumors in MRI images. 
Int J Signal Process. 2018;3:11-15.