ARTICLE 

Enhanced User Authorization Framework in Cloud Environments Using 
Weighted Proximity-Based Trust Evaluation 

D. Nethra Pingala Suthishni1,*, K. Prabavathy2, and Balusamy Nachiappan3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Information Technology, Avinashilingam Institute for Home Science and Higher 
Education for Women, Coimbatore, India. 
2Assistant Professor and Head, Department of B.Sc., (Data Science and Analytics), Sree Saraswathi Thyagaraja College, 
India. 
3Tech Lead, Prologis, USA. 
*Corresponding Author: Nethra Pingala Suthishni. Email: nethra_it@avinuty.ac.in  

Received: 20 July 2025; Accepted: 15 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Cloud computing is generally a service-based technology that offers technology services such as 
IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS through the internet. Since its inception, cloud computing has rapidly spread and is used 
in many web applications. The main advantage of these lies in the fact that the resources and services are 
accessible to thin clients. Although it seems advantageous, there are many vulnerabilities possible in terms of 
cyber threats and different attacks. Various levels of protection-based solutions are offered for cloud security, 
and access control is one of them. This paper presents a novel access control model for enhancing the security 
of the cloud. The proposed model uses the trust model for authorizing users to access different resources. The 
KNN model has recently been proposed for the prediction of trust, but the sensitivity in the present method for 
classifying the choices is not stable, especially when an imbalanced situation in the data arises. It is also noticed 
that the exponential distance, if chosen as the scheme for weighting, offers better classification performance 
and also lowers the variance. In this paper, a weights K-means nearest neighbor is proposed for the prediction 
of trust values of the user. The results have demonstrated that the proposed method is more efficient with 
respect to throughput and cost, and delay.    

KEYWORDS: Access control-nearest neighbor, cloud environment, and trust value. 
 

1 Introduction 
Cloud computing is the brainchild of distributed computing that gives services to the 

stakeholders I different aspects. The objective of these systems is to give a scalable and online-
demand-based service for the users at a low cost. The users have a lower overhead of installation of 
high-end computational devices. Also, the users do not need to procure the sophisticated 
infrastructure for high-end processing [1,2]. The important types of services that are offered through 
the cloud are Infrastructure as a Service, Platform as a Service, and Software as a Service. All these 
services are deployed in different models. There are four models in which these services are usually 
deployed, which are categorized as private, public, community, and cloud. One of the main reasons 
for organizations to move their business to the cloud is the ownership of data and processes. There 
may be a loss of control over the data and processes if used in a cloud environment. Further, these 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



16 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 
 

are vulnerable to various attacks and threats. It is a common fact that both the organization and the 
cloud service provider must have trust in the users before starting the services. They should have a 
mutual trust exchanged between them before initiating the service. The users' trust in a CSP is based 
on the level of security and QoS. In turn, the CSP trusts the users based on the user profile and other 
parameters [3-5]. Recently, the KNN model has recently proposed for the prediction of trust, but the 
sensitivity in the present method for classifying the choices is not stable, especially when an 
imbalanced situation in data arises. It is also noticed that the exponential distance, if chosen as the 
scheme for weighting, offers better classification performance and also lowers the variance. Taking 
these factors, this paper proposes a k-nearest method for the prediction of the trust value of a user. 

2 Related works 
Jain et al [2016] introduced a trust method that used the QoS parameters for evaluating the trust. 

The fuzzy concept is used for the computation of the trust value of the service providers in the cloud 
systems. This offered an increased performance in the evaluation of the system. The parameters, such 
as the turnaround time, reliability, and availability, are considered for the experiment.  

Tang et al [2017] introduced the trustworthy framework for the selection of a service provider 
called the TRUSS. The method aimed for the development of an enhanced trust-based evaluation of 
the QoS through an integrated approach for the trust evaluation using the combined objective as well 
as the subjective assessment of trust. The former is based on the monitoring of QoS, and the latter is 
based on the ratings through feedback. The experiments were performed using data which is 
synthesized, and the results show that the proposed method is better than the other state-of-the-art 
methods.  

Shote et al [2019] focus on the security of data from the stakeholders' perspective, i.e, based on 
the ownership of data and the providers. Out of the analysis from the survey, it is found that there is 
still a high demand for a still more efficient method to be developed for the trust to secure the data, 
and also, user control policies need to be further investigated. The primary need is to improve the 
data access policies, and the second is to ensure QoS, and the third is to ensure that trust is maintained 
between both the users and the provider. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
The following section describes the proposed method in detail. The method uses a weighted k-

nearest method for the prediction of trust for a given user. Figure 1 shows the proposed model 
framework. The framework consists of trust trust-dependent access control model that has different 
sub-module which uses ML techniques. If any user wants to get access to any cloud-based service, 
the request will be channeled through various levels of modules before authorization. This ensures 
the security of all the services and resources as well. The catalogue of the resource has different items 
with different reputations and trust values as well. When a certain user requests a particular 
resource, the framework checks for the trust of the user before granting access. If found as trustable, 
then the resources will be granted access, and this also ensures that there is a mutual trust 
maintained between the user and the CSP. The detailed description of each of the components is 
discussed below 
3.1 Identity and Authentication Management (IDAM) 

This is a module-based responsibility for the purpose of storing the user’s authentication and 
information on their identity, such as the user credentials. It then acts as a perfect interface in-
between the user and the cloud system. Activities such as the new user registration and update of 
any data of the users, and the removal of users are all taken care of by this module. Whenever a login 
request arises, the database of the identity is checked, and once there is a match, the user will be 
allowed to access the resource, and if not, the permission will be denied. Once authenticated, the 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 17 
 

service request will be forwarded to the URM for initiating the level 2 authentication by this specific 
module.  

Drop box Amazon Google 

Log access management 

permission Log file collector 

user 

Decision 
Identity User Request  Policy 

authentication on 

Identity DB Policy 
Ranking of resource 

information 

Catalog 

Service 
Trust Management 

User trust based on 

WKNN 

 
 

Figure 1: Overall Architecture of the Proposed Work 

3.2 Catalog Service Management of Resource (CSMR):  
The CSRM does the job of updating all the records pertaining to the services that are offered 

through cloud cloud-based service vendor (CSP). When a particular user enters the system, the 
requested service is looked up in the catalogue, and access will be granted based on the user's profile.  
3.3 User Request Management (URM)  

This particular module receives the user trust from the given PIP module, and then the same is 
forwarded as a request space vector toward making a decision and the policy enforcement module.  
 



18 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 
 

3.4 Policy Information point   
The PIP module holds the responsibility of providing the users with a trust value when requests 

are received from a URM.  
3.5 Decision and Policy Enforcement 

The DPE module takes a vital role in the decision-making regarding whether a particular 
resource which is requested to be allotted or not. As and when the request is received by a DPE, the 
URM fetches the corresponding policy from the database. It then performs the comparison of all the 
details of the users with that of the given policies and the threshold value, and then appropriate 
access would be either granted or denied. The log file module collects all the information pertaining 
to the user, whether valid or invalid. Through this, a mutual trust is maintained between the 
organization and CSP.  
3.6 Log Access Management (LAM)  

This module is responsible for the secure access of the users to the services of the cloud. The 
activities and the corresponding behavior of the users are kept stored in logs. Once the execution of 
a request is completed, feedback will be submitted back to the trust module. As this maintains a log 
of trusts of the users, these can be used in the future to update the same to be updated with new trust 
values.  
3.7 Ranking of Resources Management 

The RRM module has the complete list of resources that are available in the cloud. All these 
resources are then ranked according to the capability and the performance that can be updated 
regularly when the RRM gets a trusted reputation from the cloud. There are several trust-based 
methods for controlling access that use ML techniques. The decision of which better resource to be 
allotted to a user is based on the decision taken by RRM.  
3.8 Trust Management Module (TTM)  

The TTM takes the responsibility of a real-time assignment of the value of the user’s trust based 
on evidence. These evidences are obtained from the user behavior and is used for the evaluation of 
trust. This module takes the log file that projects all the interactions of a user that are based on the 
cloud, and it recomputes the trust value. It also computes the reputation that a particular resource 
has on the cloud and sends the trust value back to RRM for assigning a rank to the trust.  
3.9 Authorization Process 

Whenever a user wishes to access any of the cloud services, a request is required to be submitted 
to the CSP. The services are, in turn, provided by the cloud without any negotiation by the CSP. The 
negotiations would have already been covered in the service level agreement (SLA). The following 
section describes the process of authentication step by step.  

1. Only after the successful authentication by IDAM are the users allowed to request a 
particular resource in the cloud.  

2. The users are enabled with the option to choose the services required from the available 
catalogue maintained by the CSMR. The module then redirects the same to the IDAM. 

3. The IDAM, in turn, collects the requirements of the user from the CSMR, and further, a 
request is framed through the request information vector to the URM. 

4. The URM sends the user identity to the PIP module for the evaluation of trust value, and 
the PIP forwards the same to the TMM. The TMM at last forwards the trust to the PIP.  

5. Now, the URM needs to add the value of the trust of a given user in terms of a vector, and 
then forward the decision and the policy module (DPE). 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 19 
 

6. The DPE then obtains information from the URM. The DPE then makes a comparison 
between the vector that is received with the needed policies for accessing the database of policies.  

7. The RRM module then selects the most trusted and suitable resource as per the job and 
then sends it to the DPE. It enables secure access for the user to get the requested resource. It also 
has the logs that are forwarded to the TMM.  

8. The TMM finally gives secure access for the user, such that the user can access the service 
in a safe mode. It also has log files, which are forwarded later. The TMM keeps processing the log files 
of a user and their behavior.  

The proposed model was able to achieve the secured accesses that are based on a mutual level 
of trust. 
3.10 Trust Management Module (TMM) 

The TTM takes the responsibility of a real-time assignment of the value of the user’s trust based 
on evidence. These evidences are obtained from the user behavior and is used for the evaluation of 
trust. This module takes the log file that projects all the interactions of a user that are based on the 
cloud, and it re-computes the trust value. It also computes the reputation that a particular resource 
has on the cloud and sends the trust value back to RRM for assigning a rank to the trust. The model 
is depicted in Figure 2. TMM is not biased towards any of the service providers or the users. It can 
also be noticed that the TMM has different phases for computing the trust. The following section 
describes how the value of trust can be calculated based on the various functionalities.  
3.10.1 Cloud user 

Each user needs to register prior to getting access to the resources. The database maintained 
for the identity has all the information about the users. When a particular user requests a resource, 
the authenticity and the authorization are checked through different components, and the services 
will be accessible only if the process is successful.   
3.10.2 Resources 

Both the hardware and the software can be a resource. All the cloud-based resources are 
prioritized based on the pre-defined reputation and the trust value of the cloud. The trust-based 
access controls use different ML techniques before providing the grant to the particular resource.  
3.10.3 Log file of user behavior  

The logs that are created when the LAM module records all the activities that are performed by 
the user in a given cloud. The same will capture the realistic behavior of all users through the trust 
that is predicted using ML methods.  
3.10.4 SLA monitoring module 

This module captures the real-time allocation of services in the cloud. The performances of the 
resources are also monitored in this module. 
3.10.5 Feature extraction module 

This module feeds in all the logs. The module tends to capture all the relevant parameters and 
the respective values from the log files. These values are then passed to the ML-based training 
algorithms and then to the predictive module. In the proposed method, the log files from the Apache 
servers are considered. Each of the parameters is then combined with the weighted factors, and the 
corresponding strengths are determined by the factor of contribution. Here, some of the parameters 
are found to be more dominant than the others. The parameters P1, P2, …, Pn is intended to detect 
attacks and other unauthorized access requests. The user’s behavior analysis is done, and the 
corresponding output is to be included in calculating the trust values.  
 



20 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 
 

3.11 Trust Value Prediction Using Weighted K-Nearest Neighbor 
The module takes up parameters and data from the FE module. The data is then fed to the 

corresponding K-means model, and training is done. In the conventional KNN model, the 
classification sensitivity towards the choices of neighbors exists particularly in the imbalanced data. 
Hence, we introduced the weighting schemes for better classification and accurate performance, and 
also low variance. 

Start 

Read value of k type of 

distance (D) & test data 

Find k nearest neighbor to the test data 

Set maximum lable class 

of k the test data 

End 

 
 

Figure 2: Flow chart for KNN 

The proposed method takes advantage of the distance calculation for the purpose of 
classification, with the belief that there must be a concrete candidate that is chosen for the scheme of 
weighting. In this proposed method, an improved KNN is introduced to conquer the influence of the 
neighbors of K in case of precipitation in the data. Given a training set T = {{𝑥𝑛 ∈ 𝑅𝑑}𝑁

𝑛−1 that has M 
number of classes and N denotes the random numbers of the set T, and d represents the dimension 
of the feature. The labels of the class are obtained through the query point x are obtained through the 
steps as follows [9-11].  

First, the K nearest values for the query points that are not known in a given set T are identified, 
and let 𝑇̅ = {𝑥𝑁𝑁

𝑖 , 𝑐𝑁𝑁 𝑘
𝑖 }𝑥𝑖−1 represent the k-near value of x, and let K near neighbor are denoted by 

denote the set of 𝑥𝑁𝑁, 𝑥𝑁𝑁
2 , … … . . , 𝑥𝑁𝑁

1 𝐾  are then sorted in ascending order based on the respective 
Euclidean distance to x as described in Eq(1). Allocation of various weights to the K near neighbors, 
and the weight of the X and J-1 neighbor is calculated as  

𝒅 −𝒅
𝒆𝒙𝒑 (− ( 𝒌 𝒋 𝒅 +𝒅

) . ( 𝒌 𝒋)) , 𝒅𝒌   ≠ 𝒅
𝝎𝒋 = { 𝒅𝒌−𝒅𝟏 𝒅𝒌+𝒅 𝟏

𝒋     (1) 
𝟏                                                                        𝒅𝒌 = 𝒅𝟏

 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 21 
 

 
Figure 3: Working procedure of k-nearest neighbor 

Classification of the query point x of the class C is done by the majority weighted voting of the 
neighbors. 

𝒂𝒓𝒈 𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝒄̅ = ∑

(𝒙 𝝎 (𝒄 = 𝑵𝑵)
𝒄 𝑵𝑵.𝑪𝑵𝑵 𝒋. 𝒄𝒋  ( )

𝑱 )∈𝑻̅    2  
𝑱

WEIGHTED K-NEAREST NEIGHBOR 
The steps are given as under 
1. Calculate the distances of the nearest neighbors of the query 
2. Arrange the distances in increasing order 
3. Search the k-nearest neighbors of the query X_ 
4. Compute the weight of the K-Nearest Neighbors  
5. For i=1 to K, do Steps 1-5 
6. End for  
7. Assign the major weighted voter class label Y1 and X1 
8. End 

4 Results and Discussion 
Owing to the wide range of the cloud and the practical difficulty in conducting real-time 

experiments, the JAVA simulator and the cloud-sim are used for experimental purposes. In order to 
evaluate the proposed WKNN model, the comparison is made with that of the other methods, taking 
the performance metrics as Throughput, Delay, and Accuracy, and the benchmark methods such as 
FL and KNN. Figure 4 depicts the performance outcomes for the existing FL, KNN, and the proposed 
technique as of throughput is considered. From the figure, it seems that the proposed WKNN model 
has more throughput than the FL and KNN methods, with 590 kbps. 

Table 1: Performance comparison results 

 Methods 

Metrics FL KNN WKNN 

Throughput(kbp 450(kbps) 572(kbps) 590(kbps) 

s) 

Delay(sec) 700(sec) 650(sec) 530(sec) 



22 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 
 

Accuracy (%) 74 82 90 

 

700
600
500
400

FL
300
200 KNN

100 WKNN

0
FL KNN WKNN

methods

 

Figure 4: Throughput results vs. classification methods 

 

800

700

600

500

400 FL

300 KNN
200

WKNN
100

0
FL KNN WKNN

methods

 

Figure 5: Delay results vs. classification methods 

100

80

60
FL

40
KNN

20 WKNN

0
FL KNN WKNN

methods

 
Figure 6: Accuracy results vs. classification methods 

ACCURACY(%) Delay(sec) Throughput(kbps)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 23 
 

Figure 5 shows the graph, which is the comparative analysis of the FL and KNN with the 
proposed method, taking the delay as the metric. From the graph, it is evident that the proposed 
model has a lower delay of 530 seconds when compared to FL (700S) and KNN (650S), respectively. 

Figure 6 shows the graph, which is the comparative analysis of the FL and KNN with the 
proposed method, taking the accuracy as the metric. From the graph, it is evident that the proposed 
model has a high accuracy of 87% when compared to FL (68%) and KNN (81%), respectively. 

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5 Normal users

0.4 Malicisous users

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
10 20 30 40 50

Iterations  
Figure 7: User trust value on communication results vs. iterations 

Figure 7 depicts the trust value of the communication outcomes in the proposed WKNN 
technique. From the graph, it is seen that the X-axis refers to the iteration and the Y-axis refers to the 
value of trust in the communication. From the graph, it is seen that the malicious users who have a 
trust value below 0.5 are detected by the proposed method. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper presents an effective evaluation mechanism for trust using the weighted K nearest 

neighbor for accurate prediction of trust of a user using the weighted K nearest neighbor algorithm. 
It is identified that the weighted scheme shows more accuracy and better classification performance 
with less variance that the user to be trusted before accessing the resource. The contributions of the 
proposed system are pointed out as follows: 1. It enables a scheme of trust evaluation of the efficiency 
of the cloud 2. It aimed to ease the IaaS selection process and offer more stability in the service when 
using clouds through the consideration of performance in the selection phase. The future research is 
aimed at building different policies for selection for cloud usage and brokers based on the proposed 
method to further automate the deployment. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: D. Nethra Pingala Suthishni; supervision and 

User trust value on communication



24 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):2 
 

writing: K. Prabavathy; review and editing: Balusamy Nachiappan. All authors reviewed the results and 
approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Chiregi M, Navimipour NJ. A comprehensive study of the trust evaluation mechanisms in the cloud 

computing. J Serv Sci Res. 2017;9(1):1-30. 
2. Arora S, Dalal S. Trust evaluation factors in cloud computing with open stack. J Comput Theor Nanosci. 

2019;16(12):5073-7. 
3. Rathi P, Ahuja H, Pandey K. Rule based trust evaluation using fuzzy logic in cloud computing. In 2017 6th 

International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (Trends and Future 
Directions) (ICRITO); 2017 Sep 20, Noida, India; 2017. p. 510-514. 

4. Sule MJ, Li M, Taylor G. Trust modeling in cloud computing. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Service-Oriented 
System Engineering (SOSE); 2016 Mar 29, Oxford, UK; 2016. p. 60-65. 

5. Abdullayeva F. CPTrustworthiness: new robust model for trust evaluation in cloud computing. In 2016 
IEEE 10th International Conference on Application of Information and Communication Technologies 
(AICT); 2016 Oct 12, Baku, Azerbaijan; 2016. p. 1-6. 

6. Jain S. A trust model in cloud computing based on fuzzy logic. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on 
Recent Trends in Electronics, Information & Communication Technology (RTEICT); 2016 May 20, 
Bangalore, India; 2016. p. 47-52. 

7. Tang M, Dai X, Liu J, Chen J. Towards a trust evaluation middleware for cloud service selection. Future 
Gener Comput Syst. 2017;74:302-12. 

8. Dhote BL, Krishna Mohan G. Trust and security to shared data in cloud computing: open issues. In 
International Conference on Advanced Computing Networking and Informatics: ICANI; 2018 Nov 28, 
Singapore; 2018. p. 117-126. 

9. Deng Z, Zhu X, Cheng D, Zong M, Zhang S. Efficient kNN classification algorithm for big data. 
Neurocomputing. 2016;195:143-8. 

10. Popescu M, Keller JM. Random projections fuzzy k-nearest neighbor (RPFKNN) for big data classification. 
In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE); 2016 Jul 24, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada; 2016. p. 1813-1817. 

11. Guo Y, Cao H, Han S, Sun Y, Bai Y. Spectral–spatial hyperspectral image classification with k-nearest 
neighbor and guided filter. IEEE Access. 2018;6:18582-91.