ARTICLE 

Two-Dimensional Signal Decomposition for Feature Reduction and Deep 
Learning-Based Object Detection 

K. Reena1,*, A. Kalaivani2 and T. Karthikeyan3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Mathematics, Nehru Arts and Science College (Autonomous), Coimbatore, India. 
2Associate Professor, Computer Applications, Nehru Arts and Science College, Coimbatore, India. 
3Department of Information Technology, University of Technology and Applied Sciences - Salalah, Thumrait Rd Thumrayt 
Street – OM 211, Sultanate of Oman. 
*Corresponding Author: K. Reena. Email: nascreena@nehrucolleges.com  

Received: 13 August 2025; Accepted: 25 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Object detection is one of the important and widely used methods for the identification of target 
objects in a specific image and for the determination of the position and category for achieving machine vision’s 
understanding. A lot of approaches are proposed in the literature for obtaining a solution to this problem. Best 
results have been obtained by using deep learning and computer vision-based methods. However, most of the 
existing techniques perform under expectation, particularly in detecting the small and dense objects and in the 
detection of objects which has random transformations in geometric measures. The sparse representation 
methods often fail to perform particularly in cases where the rate of recognition is higher. The problem of object 
detection can be represented in three stages, namely the representation, dimension reduction, and object 
detection. Initially, a dictionary is used for the representation of samples undergoing test, followed by a sparse 
representation. Secondly, in order to resolve the issue of high dimensionality of the features, Bi-Dimensional 
Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEMD) is introduced for dimension reduction. Thirdly, an architecture called 
AlexNET is proposed for getting the multi-scaled feature and to add a convolutional structure for the detection 
of dictionaries for the identification of objects, which is used as a guideline for the selection of architecture for 
achieving performance measures such as speed, memory, and accuracy. Lastly, the visualization of images from 
the COCO dataset, which shows side-to-side comparison with the existing methods which lies on the “optimal 
front” of the speed vs. accuracy plot. The experimental results are compared with the state-of-the-art 
techniques in various performance metrics, with emphasis on speed and accuracy of the latest methods of 
object detection. 

KEYWORDS: Object Detectors, Bi-dimensional Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEMD), deep learning, 
AlexNet, Sparse Reduction, and Common Objects in Context (COCO) dataset. 
 

1 Introduction 
Object detection is a basic research issue in the computer vision domain, and numerous methods 

are available in the literature for addressing the challenges. The importance of object detection is for 
the identification of one or more targets image/video. It includes a large range of methods such as 
image processing, recognition of patterns, and ML. The applications of these are widely adopted, such 
as traffic control and prevention of accidents [1], to issue warnings in factories, military-related 
monitoring, and in advanced human-system interaction [2,3]. As the application domains are mostly 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



35 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

in the use cases of multi-target scenarios, the relationship between the accuracy and cost has become 
difficult to balance.  

The process of object detection is conventionally established through manual extraction of the 
models of features, where commonly identified features are represented through Histogram of 
Oriented Gradient (HOG), SIFT, Haar–based features, and other classical techniques that rely on 
grayscale. SVM-based methods or Adaboost techniques are normally used for classification to obtain 
target data. These classical methods of extracting models were only capable of determining low-level 
data on the features, such as information on contour and textures, and have limitations for detecting 
multiple levels of targets under complex scenarios, owing to poor performance.  

Numerous studies have been made in the recent past on the issues of object detection owing to 
the usage of CNNs. These are ML models that come under Deep learning. In order to perform image 
recognition, the CNNs can make use of the image information as inputs without pre-processing and 
additional feature extractions. Hence, Conventional Neural Networks (CNNs) are very much suitable 
for the extraction of features in images, which include shapes, textures, and topology. Advanced 
methods such as Fast R-CNN [4], R-FCN [5], SSD [6], multi-box [7], and YOLOs [8] are presently good 
for deployment in consumer-based products, which normally run in mobile devices. 

Server-based production techniques, which are used in web applications such as Google or 
Facebook, have more importance to accuracy but are still subject to throughput. Advanced methods 
such as the COCO challenge [9] are more optimized in terms of accuracy, often rely on models that 
ensembles multi-crops-based techniques, which are very slow to be used practically. Only a few 
researches [5,7,8] addresses the issue of running time in a detailed manner. Further, it is also 
identified that these methods are good in achieving frame-rate but do not provide a clear picture of 
the speed and accuracy that relies on other factors such as the extractor, input size, and image, etc.  

It is highly difficult for the researchers to come to a conclusion on which architecture shall be 
used for the application, and also the standard metrics of accuracy. The average precision (mAP) does 
not speak much here, as the real-time deployment of computer vision, running time, and usage of 
memory are also vital. It is identified that the existing methods perform poorly in order to detect 
small and dense objects, and even more difficult to identify the objects that undergo frequent 
geometric transformations. With an aim of high-dimensional problems including deep features, the 
Bi-Dimensional Empirical Mode of Decomposition (BEMD) is introduced for reducing the 
dimensions. It is used for serving as a guideline for identifying a suitable architecture that achieves 
higher speed and less memory usage with high accuracy in a specific application. Finally, AlexNet is 
introduced for object detection, and the architecture is proposed for obtaining multi-scaled features 
and which adds deformable structures. Experiments are carried out to trace the speed vs accuracy 
curve for various detection systems, which vary in meta-architecture, feature extraction, and image 
resolution. Etc. 

2 Literature Review 
Bell et al [10] proposed Inside-Outside Net (ION) for detecting objects that exploit the 

information both in and out of the regions of interest. The context information, which lies outside the 
regions of interest, is integrated with the aid of spatial and recurrent neural networks. On the inner 
side, a skip pooling technique is used for the evaluation of design spaces, which provides readers 
with an overview of which methods are most important. The proposed method improves the most 
used PASCAL-based VOC method of detecting objects from 73.9 to 77.9% mAP. The proposed model 
has shown an improvement of 19.6% to 33.1% in mAP in the challenging MS common object in 
context (COCO). The proposed method confirms that the usage of ION plays a vital role in the multi-
scale representation and improves the detection of small objects.  



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 36 
 
 

Erhan et al [11] proposed the Deep Convolution Neural Network (DCNNs), which achieves state-
of-the-art performance in numerous image recognition including the ImageNet Visual Challenge of 
Recognition (ILSVRC-2012). The proposed model is based on the localization, which uses a single 
bounding box and a score for the confidence of every object in the image. Such models capture 
contexts of the whole image around the required objects, but cannot handle the issue of multiple 
instances of the same object. The proposed method uses a saliency-based neural network for object 
detection that predicts the set of bounding boxes termed as class-agnostics with scores for every box, 
and the corresponding likelihoods are calculated. The proposed method inherits a number for each 
variable of instances and for each class, a generalization is allowed in a high-level order of the 
network. The proposed method has the advantage of having a grid in regular grid that predicts the 
boxes that are written as predictors on the images, which has shared parameters.  

Fu et al [12] proposed the Single Shot Multibox (SSD) method for the introduction of additional 
contexts in the modern methods for detecting objects. In order to achieve the same, the authors have 
combined a classifier with a rapid detection framework called SSD. The proposed SSD with a de-
convolution layer is introduced with additional contexts for the detection of objects and to improve 
accuracy, especially for the small objects, which calls the result system – DSSD for de-convolution 
single shot-based detector. The scenario of using these contributions can be easily described in a 
high-level manner, but a traditional method does not give success. The experimental results show 
that a potential way forward is achieved in terms of the detection parameters of PASCAL, VOC, and 
COCO.  

Kim et al [13] investigated how accuracy can be achieved at the maximum level in the case of 
multi-category object detection, while minimizing the cost. The proposed method adapts and 
combines the recent methodologies. The technique also follows the common pipeline of CNN-based 
feature extraction and ROI classification that aligns with the recent techniques such as truncated 
SVDs. The principle of design adapted here is the “less channeled and more layered” approach with 
adaptation of building blocks, which includes concatenated ReLU and Hypernet. The proposed 
framework is deep as well as thin, which is trained with the aid of batch-based normalization and 
with residual-enabled connections, where the rate of scheduling is based on plateau detection.  

Lin et al [14] proposed the technique that uses a multi-scale and parametric hierarchy in a deep 
convolution network for constructing a features’ pyramid that has marginal additional cost. The top-
down approach with laterally biased connections is developed to build high-level semantics-based 
maps in all scales. The proposed Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) proved significantly better when 
compared with generic methods of feature extraction. The technique uses a fundamental R-CNN 
system that achieves state-of-the-art results on the COCO models without whistles, which includes 
those from the 2016 challenge winners. Finally, the technique, which can run at 5 frames per second 
on a single GPU, has also been developed, bringing out practical and more accurate solutions for 
object detection.  

Shrivatsav et al [15] introduced a simple but powerful technique called the Online Hard Example 
Mining (OHEM) for the training of ConvNet detection. The authors are motivated by the dataset, 
which had higher count of easy objects and a small count of hard objects. OHEM uses a simple 
algorithm that eliminates the heuristics and extra parameters in common use. The proposed method 
consistently increases the performance on standards such as PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012. The 
effectiveness of the proposed method increases as the size of the data increases and yields better 
results in the MS COCO dataset. Moreover, these are combined with the advances of OHEM, which 
leads to better results with 78.9% mAP.  

Huang et al [16] conducted research on different types of trade accuracy for ensuring speed and 
the usage of memory in modern methods of CNN-based object detection systems. A range of 
successful techniques has been introduced in the recent past, but comparisons such as apples-to-



37 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

apples were difficult. A unified mode of implementation on the fast region-based CNN and SSD 
methods is adopted by making use of alternate feature extraction and other parameters, such as the 
size of the image within all of the meta-architecture. At one end of the spectrum, where the speed as 
well as the memory are vital, a common detector is introduced that can achieve all the speeds 
required in real-time in a mobile device. As far as the accuracy is concerned, a detector is introduced 
that can achieve better performance based on the COCO detections. Wei et al [17] introduced an 
image recognition approach based on DNN with adaptive and weight-based Joint Sparse 
Representation (D-AJSR). The proposed model is a data-lightweight framework that can classify and 
recognize objects well within a few training samples. In the proposed method, CNN is used for the 
extraction of deep features on the training samples as well as the testing samples. Then, the AD-WJSR 
method is adopted for sparse representation, where the Eigen vectors are again reconstructed 
through the calculation of each of the eigen vectors. Aiming at the problem of high dimension, the 
PCA is implemented for dimension reduction. At last, these models are combined with the sparse 
model, the common features, and the private features of these images, which are extracted through 
the samples, for constructing a dictionary. Sparse-based classifiers are used for object detection. The 
experimental results show that the proposed method is superior to the existing methods.  

Lu et al [18] introduced a method for object detection which are based on an improvised R-CNN 
technique. The improved method can easily identify the regions where the objects belong to and are 
scattered in different complex appliances more quickly and in an automated manner. The feature-
enhanced framework named the deeper proposal network (RPN) is an enhancement model for the 
effective extraction of features in an object in a kitchen appliance scene. The U-shape network is then 
restructured with the aid of a series of enhancement modules of the feature. The experiments 
performed best in object detection and have attained a mean average precision of 89%. The 
experiments also prove that the proposed method achieves more detection accuracy than the other 
modern methods of object detection. The proposed method also works well when applied to the 
recognition of texts. Cao et al [19] made an analysis of the mainstream-based object detection 
methods and a multi-scaled deformable object detection framework, which are proposed for dealing 
with the issues faced by the present methods. The research analysis demonstrates that the strong 
performance is on par with or even better than the state of the methods. Deep methods are 
introduced for obtaining multi-level features and to add DCS structures for overcoming the geometric 
transformations. Fusion of multi-scaled and multi-level features is generated using sampling for the 
implementation of the final recognition of objects and regression. The experiments prove that the 
suggested frameworks can improve the efficiency in detecting the small objects that have geometrical 
deformation, which shows a consistent improvement in the trade-offs between speed and accuracy.   

3 Proposed Methodology 
In the initial stage, a dictionary is made for representing the samples taken for testing, and then 

the sparse representation coefficients are used. Next, in order to resolve the issue of high-
dimensionality, the Bi-Dimensional Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEMD) is introduced. Thirdly, 
the architecture named Alexnet is implemented for obtaining the features that are multi-scaled in 
nature, and to which the deformable CNNs are added for detecting the dictionary for object 
identification. Primarily, the four recent meta-architectures, the SSD, R-CNN, R-FCN, and AlexNet, are 
proposed. 

3.1 Sparse Representation  
This framework for object detection is then gradually implemented for other classifications of 

images and object recognition. If there are N images in training, X =  [x1, x2, . . . , xn](xi  ∈
 Rm, general m <<  n), that belong to K number of classes, then all the training data shall be given as, 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 38 
 
 

W = [W1, … .Wk] ∈ Rm∗n    (1) 

Here, Wi = [vi,1, vi,2, . . . , vi,n], vi,j  denotes the jth number of samples in the ith class, and ni 
denotes the number of samples in the ith class. According to the theory of Sparsed Representation, 
SR, fresh test samples such as y ∈  Rm of the class “i” shall be expressed linearly by the sample 
taken for training, and the same is represented as Wi  as in [20]: 

y = αi,1vi,1 + αi,2vi,2 + ⋯+ αi,n vi,n    
i i  (2) 

where αi,j ∈ R  is the sparse representation coefficient of y, j ∈  1, 2, . . . , ni . Without 
considering the noise, equation (2) can be written as equation (3), 

y = Wx    (3) 

T
where x =  [0, . . . , 0, αi,1,αi,2, . . . , αi,n , . . . , 0]  ∈  Rn. To get the sparsest x, object detectors need 

i

to solve the following l1 minimization problem by equation (4), 

x′ = argmin||x||  s. t Wx = y    (4) 
1

Here, x denotes the coefficient vectors and  ||x||1 = ∑i|xi|  is in l1 norm. For each of the 
classes, a mapping function is introduced, such as δi(x

′) =  [0, . . . , 0, xi, 0, . . . , 0] for representing 
the non-zero elements which are selected in the corresponding vector of the ith class, the samples 
taken for test are then reconstructed using the coefficient of sparsity as y′ = Wδi(x

′)𝑠. Hence, y is 
determined for classification in class(i) through the minimum residual through equation (5), 

class(i) = argmin ||y − W δi(x
′)||2     (5) 

i

In the above equation, ‖. ‖2 is l2 norm and i =  1, 2, . . . , k. In case of sparse representations, 
owing to the correlation between different images, the related images can be used as a single set 
where every image shall be represented in terms of a combination of public and private means of 
features in a specific sparse representation. The public features are a part of all images in one set, 
whereas the private features are the characteristic part and are unique to every image. Hence, the jth 
image shall be represented by means of public features and can ascertain its own features, which are 
private and are represented as, 

yj = zc + zj, j ∈ {1,… J}     (6) 

In the above equation, zc depicts the features that are classified as public and zj denotes the 
features that are private to the jth image. Assuming such that the images are divided into K number 
of classes and as there are J images for training in every training image in every category. If a 
particular image is represented in terms of a single-dimensional vector, the image on the ith object 

T
can be given in terms denoted as yi  ∈  [yi,1, yi,2, . . . , yi,j] . As far as the sparse representations are 
considered, the jth image of the ith class shall be represented in the equation as follows, 

y c
i,j = zi + zi

i,j, j ∈ {1, … J}     (7) 

In the above equation, zc
i  denotes the features that are public on the images of the ith number 

of object and zi
i,j denotes the own private features. In case of Ψ ∈  RN×N is orthonormal, which 

can represent the training image, then the equation (7) shall be represented as in (8), 



39 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

θ c
i,j = Ψzi + Ψzi c

i,j = i
θi + θi,j    (8) 

Here, the θi,j  ∈ Ψyi,j defines the representation of yi,j based on transformation and Ψ and 
θc

i = Ψzc
i  and θc

i,j = Ψzi
i,j  represents the parts in terms of public and private denoted by Ψ , 

respectively. Multiplied by ΨT, on both the sides, then (8) is reduced to (9), 

ΨTθi,j = ΨTΨzc c i
i + ΨTΨzi T

i,j = ΨTθi + Ψ θi,j = zc
i + zi

i,j    (9) 

c c
Combined with equation (7), y T

i,j = ΨTθi  +  Ψ θi,j, so the joint representation of the image 
can be expressed by equation (10), 

C

y  θi  
i,1 i

 y  ΨT ΨT 0 … 0  θi,1 
i,2

 ΨT 0 ΨT … 0  
⋮  i

  = [ ] . θ  
i,2    

⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋱ 0   (10) 
 ⋮  

ΨT 0 0 … ΨT  ⋮  
[yi,j ]  ⋮  

i
[θi,j ]

Equation (10) can be simplified to equation (11), 

yi = Ψ̃Wi    (11) 

T
Here, yi = [xi,1, xi,2, . . . , xi,j] and W c

i = [ i i
θi , θi,1, θi,2  · · · i T

θi,j] . Ψ̃ = [A, B]  are the complete 
T

dictionary, which consists of a couple of parts; A = [ΨT ΨT  · · ·  ΨT ]  and B =  diag(A) . 
Wi preserves the discriminated information, and the same representation in sparse shall be obtained 
through solving the (l1) minimization of the following equation (12), 

Wi = argmin||Wi|| s. t. yi = Ψ̃Wi    (12) 
1

After obtaining 𝑊𝑖 , the public features of all images in object i, and the private features of each 
image can be obtained in the Ψ field according to the inverse transformation, 

zc = ΨT c
i θi     (13) 

zi T i
i,j = Ψ θi,j    (14) 

All the features that are public form a joint feature D, and the same is represented as in (15), 

D = [zc, zc
2, … . zc

k, z
1 2
1,1, … z1

1 1,J, z2,1, … z2
2,J, … , zk

K,1, … , zk
K,J]    (15) 

3.2 Bi-dimensional Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEMD) 
The process of iteration and shifting of Bi-Dimensional Empirical Mode (BEMD) is the same as 

that of EMD. The method is a time-bound method of analysis, especially suited for non-linear and 
non-stationary data. The important idea is to find an intrinsic multi-scale variation of the input image. 
Du et al [21], intrinsic functions are expressed through the Equation (16) as follows, 

X(t) = ∑n
i=1 IMFi + Rn    (16) 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 40 
 
 
Here, the X(t) indicates the image taken as input, and the RN is the residue, which is decomposed into 
Intrinsic Mode Function (IMFs) and residue. The images can be considered as a 2D matrix f(x,y).   
3.2.1 Definition of Extrema Point 

Given a one-dimensional input, it is easy to define the required peaks and the valleys of an image 
as the extremes. The identification of these extremes in a two-dimensional image is then performed 
by searching for the same in octa directions individually along the rows and columns, including 
diagonals, in a matrix of pixels, which are tabulated. If a given point is taken as a peak or as a valley 
in all directions, then the same is called a two-dimensional extreme. As the BEMD involves more 
shifting and iteration, the time consumption is higher for identifying the extrema. Initially, the 
extremes along the columns are identified, and then the rows that have the extrema values of the 
corresponding columns are found. This sequence helps in saving time. A condition is termed 
exceptional when there is a flat peak in the image. In this scenario, the middle point is only 
considered.  
3.2.2 Interpolation and Smoothness 

After obtaining the extreme points, the next step aims to get the maximum and the minimum 
surface envelopes through the smoothness and through the interpolation. Triangulation is used in 
the cubic spline interpolation of the traditional EMD technique. If the point is seen outside the convex 
hull, the triangulation fails on the point, which results in its infinity, and may also cause the boundary 
effect of dimension reduction. However, the function is a distance-based interpolation technique 
where N points of pixels are pointed to a full N*N matrix that shall be generated. A system of 
equations is then solved by making use of the matrix. Hence, the function tends to be quieter and 
slow down even when applied to problems of even size. In order to tackle the above issues, the Gridoff 
tool is used for the extrapolation of the outside convex hull and for generating a smooth surface 
envelope for the reduction of the actual input matrix of the image.  
3.2.3 Stopping Criteria in the Iteration Process  

In most conditions, the value obtained for IMFs that use the BEMD cannot satisfy the conditions 
of the IMF’s definition. The global solution is to be proposed for judging the convergence. Additional 
iterative decomposition shall not provide excess information when the criteria for convergence are 
very small. As an alternative, one can also make use of the methods with a stopping criterion. The 
criteria for SD are denoted as, 

2

SD = ∑x ∑y |Hi,(j−1)(x,y)−Hi,j(x,y)|
i=0 j=0 [ 2 ] < 𝑟    (17) 

Hi,(j−1)(x,y)

Where SD is a stopping criterion. r is defined as a constant that is pre-defined in the range of 0.2 to 
0.3. The details of the decomposition methods (BEMD) are given as,  

1. To find all the local minimum and maximum of the function f(x,y) to reduce the dimension of 
the original matrix image. 

2. To perform the interpolation of the surface that uses the extrema from step 1 to obtain the 
maximum envelope surface 𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥, 𝑦) with the minimum value of the envelope surface 
𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦) . Here, the extension of the image is necessary for avoiding the invalid 
interpolations caused by boundary conditions. 

3. To calculate the mean envelope surface Avg(x,y), which is based on the maximum envelope 
surface and the minimum envelope surface.  

4. 𝐻𝑖𝑗  is then obtained through the subtraction of the average envelope from the basic 
signal(x,y), where; 𝐻𝑖𝑗 indicates the jth iterations of the ith process of shifting.  



41 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

5. To confirm whether the criteria for stopping are satisfied. If not, then the 𝐻𝑖𝑗 is defined as 
f(x, y), and to repeat the steps from 1 to 4. If the condition for stopping is already satisfied, it 
is possible to obtain the 𝐼𝑀𝐹𝑖 as, 

IMFi(x, y) = f(x, y) − Hij(x, y)    (18) 

This is termed as complete process of shifting. The steps through 1-5 are then repeated till the 
threshold becomes a constant and which indicates that the BEMD process of shifting is complete. 
3.3 Object detection  

The anchor methodology is intended to minimize the losses in terms of combined regressions 
and classification. For every anchor, an initial and best-matching truth box b is proposed. If there is a 
match found, it is termed as “positive anchor” and assigned as (1) in a class label 𝒚𝒂  ∈ {𝟏,… ,𝑲} and 
(2) denotes the vector encoding of the box b corresponding to an anchor ‘a’ and set to the class label 
as 𝒚𝒂 =  𝟎 . If an anchor is a predicted box that has the encoding of 𝒇𝒍𝒐𝒄(𝑰;  𝒂;  𝜽)  which 
corresponds to the class 𝒇𝒄𝒍𝒔(𝑰;  𝒂;   𝜽) , where I denotes the image and 𝜽  denotes the model’s 
parameter. In this context, the loss for ‘a’ is then measured as the weighted sum of the location-based 
losses and the classification-based losses, and the same is represented as, 

ℒ(a, ℐ; θ) = α. 1[a is positive]. ℓloc(ϕ(ba, a) − floc(ℐ; a, θ)) + β. ℓcls(ya, fcls(ℐ; a, θ))    (19) 

Here, 𝜶,𝜷  denote the weights of the balancing localizations as well as the losses due to 
classification. In order to train the model, Equation (19) is leveraged over the anchors and also 
minimized in terms of parameter θ. In the case of multibox[11], these “box priors” are generated by 
the clustering of truth boxes of the dataset. In advanced techniques, these anchors are then generated 
through the tiling of a collection of various boxes in different aspect ratios and in different scales 
regularly across the given image. One advantage of having such an anchor is that these predictors 
shall be written as tiled predictions of the image that share parameters and are reminiscent of 
conventional sliding window techniques. The fast R-CNN[4] and the latest multibox[6] are the ones 
to adopt this technique in the preliminary experiments.  
3.3.1 Single Shot Detector (SSD) 

This refers to the broad architecture which uses a single feed-forward network for direct 
prediction of classes and the offsets of anchors that does not require a second stage per-proposal of 
classification operation [22]. Under these definitions, the SSD architecture has been explored in 
numerous precursors as mentioned in [22]. Both the Multibox and the RPN stage of Faster CNN [6] 
can use this approach for predicting the class-agonistic boxes for predicting the final class labels [12]. 
3.3.2 Faster R-CNN 

In the case of the faster R-CNN settings, the detection is expected to be in a couple of stages. In 
the initial stage, the region proposals are called using the RPNs, and the images are processed using 
a feature extractor, and the features are selected at an intermediate level, such as in conv5 are used 
for the prediction of class-agonistic proposals. The loss functions are taken in the form as in 
equation(19), which uses the anchor grids. In the later stage, these proposals are then used for the 
cropping of features in the same intermediate maps that are subsequently fed into the remains of the 
extractor (such as in fc7) for predicting the class and class-specific refinement of every proposal. The 
loss functions for these stages also take the form of equation(19) by using the proposals that are 
generated from the RPN of anchors. It is also to be noted that the crop proposals are obtained directly 
from the image and are re-run using the feature extractions, which can be duplicated in 
computations. However, there is a part of the computations that must be run only once in a region, 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 42 
 
 
which makes the run time dependent on the number of independent regions that are proposed by 
RPN.  
3.3.3 Region-based Fully Convolutional Networks (R-FCN) 

The faster R-CNN is considered in terms of magnitude, which is faster than the R-CNN, the facts 
that these are region-specific components that must be applied several times on an image. Dai et 
al[15] have proposed the R-FCN methods, which are like the Faster R-CNN, but here, instead of 
features being cropped in the same layer, the crops are instead taken from the final layers of feature 
prediction. This kind of approach, by pushing the cropping into the last layers, is then taken from the 
features before the prediction. This kind of pushing the cropping into the last layer actually minimizes 
the volume of per-region computations that need to be performed. Dai et al[5] recommend that the 
object recognition task needs to localize the representations that respect the translation variance, 
and thus, which can propose the sensitive mechanisms that are used instead of more standard ROI 
operations[4] and the differentiated crop technique. They, in turn, show that the R-FCN model, which 
uses the Resnet 101, should achieve more accuracy for faster CNNs often than the running times.  
3.3.4 AlexNet CNN deep learning architecture 

In this work, the AlexNET architecture with CNN deep learning[22] is introduced for the 
detection of objects. The network is presented in a deeper way than the regular CNN with 5 
convolution layers, which is followed by three kinds of pooling layers. A dropout of 0.5 percent can 
be applied to the fully connected layers to avoid the issue of overfitting. The proposed architecture is 
shown in Figure 1. 

 
Figure 1: AlexNET convolution neural network architecture of the proposed framework 

In this work, the input layer is presented as the pre-processing layer where the input images 
are sampled from the initial size to 227*227 in spatial resolution to reduce the cost of computation. 
The proposed system then used five CONV layers, which are then followed by the three POOL layers 
and a Rectifying Linear Unit (RELU).  



43 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

Each of the convolutional layers generates a feature map. These maps are of the first, second, 
and the fifth layer, which are used in various combinations with the pooling layers of a 3*3 matrix 
and with the side of a 2*2 matrix. These frameworks are comprised of eight different layered 
architectures that have 4096 nodes. These generate the trainable feature sets in a feature extraction 
phenomenon of these layers. These are then subjected to Soft Max activation for the determination 
of classification probability used for the final classification output. These probabilities, which are in 
the softmax layer, can make categories up to 1000 various other classifiers.  
3.3.4.1. Convolution Network Layer 

This layer is significant in the deep learning context with neural networks, which generates 
feature maps that are confined to the classification. It has a kernel that can slide over the image, which 
is taken as input, and which generates an output called a feature map. In each location of the input, a 
matrix multiplication is performed, which is followed by the integration of the results. The feature 
map’s output is then defined as, 

𝑟

𝑁𝑟 𝑁𝑟−1−𝐿𝑟
= 𝑥 𝑥 𝑁 −1−𝐿𝑟

𝑦
+ ,𝑁𝑟 𝑦

𝑥 =
𝑆𝑟 1 𝑦  ( 0  

𝑆𝑟 + 1   2 )
𝑥 𝑦

Here, 𝑵𝒙, 𝑵𝒚 denotes the width as well as the height of the expected output of the feature map 
in the final layer, and  𝑳𝒙, 𝑳𝒚 denote the size of the kernel 𝑺𝒙, 𝑺𝒚 which depicts the total count of 
the pixels that are skipped through the kernel in a horizontal and vertical direction with index r that 
indicates the corresponding layer, i.e, r=1.  Convolution is then applied to the input, and the kernel 
is used to get the output, which is defined as, 

𝑋1(𝑚, 𝑛) = (𝐽 ∗ 𝑅)(𝑚, 𝑛)    (21) 

Here, 𝑿𝟏(𝒎,𝒏)  denote a 2D output of the feature map, which is obtained through the 
convolution of a 2D kernel R of the size (𝑳𝒙, 𝑳𝒚) with the feature map denoted by J. The * symbol is 
used for the representation of convolution between the J&R. The same is represented as, 

𝐿 𝐿𝑦
𝑝=+ 𝑥 𝑞=+

𝑋1(𝑚, 𝑛) = ∑ 2 2
𝐿 ∑ 𝐿 𝐽(𝑚 − 𝑝, 𝑛 − 𝑞)𝑅(𝑝, 𝑞)    (22) 

𝑝=− 𝑥 𝑦
2 𝑞=−

2

In the proposed method, there are five layers of CONV along with RELU, and the normalization 
layers are used for extracting the maximum number of feature maps from the input stage for training 
the dataset to ensure maximum efficiency.  

3.3.4.2. Rectified Linear Unit Layer 

In the following stage, the activation of the RELU function is done for all the layers that are 
trainable for strengthening the network to make it non-linear. The proposed layer accounts for the 
non-linearity in all possible manners. It is then applied over the feature map, which has been 
generated from the CL. The use of 𝒕𝒂𝒏𝒉(.) and the RELU function makes the non-linear gradient to 
get saturate and results in terms of training time. The same is expressed as, 

𝐿 𝐿𝑦
𝑝=+ 𝑥 𝑞=+

𝑋1(𝑚, 𝑛) = ∑ 2 2
𝐿 ∑ 𝐿 𝐽(𝑚 − 𝑝, 𝑛 − 𝑞)𝑅(𝑝, 𝑞)    (23) 

𝑝=− 𝑥 𝑦
2 𝑞=−

2



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 44 
 
 

Values of the final feature maps are then obtained by applying the RELU, and the same is 
represented as, 

0, 𝑖𝑓 𝑋
𝑋(𝑚, 𝑛) = 2(𝑚, 𝑛 < 0)

{     (24) 
𝑋2(𝑚, 𝑛), 𝑖𝑓 𝑋2(𝑚, 𝑛 ≥ 0)

Here, the 𝑥(𝑚. 𝑛) is achieved through the transformation of negative inputs to zero and then 
returning the same on receipt of any positive values. The RELU layer is then considered to be the 
proposed framework as the deep neural networks are trained much faster and are intact with the 
RELU layers.  

3.3.4.3. Maximum Pooling Layer 
A layer for pooling is then included in the architecture proposed after the initial and final 

convolution, and then through the 5th CONV for decreasing the spatial size of every image to bring 
down the cost of computation of the framework proposed. The pooling operation simply picks the 
value that is maximum value for every slice on the image. The applications of the pooling layer, which 
is on the activation’s output for down-sampling, are shown in Figure 2. 

  

Figure 2: Maximum Pooling Layer 

In the proposed method, the pooling is applied for using the maximum values against every 
slice, and the same brings better results with this mechanism. 

3.3.4.4. Response Normalization Layer and the Softmax Activation 
This is performed after two successful sessions to reduce the error while testing the proposed 

networks. The layer helps in normalizing the input layers inside the network all along with the inputs 
of the whole network, and the same is described as, 

𝑁𝑥 𝑏𝑥
𝑒,𝑓

𝑒,𝑓 =
𝑐 𝑌   

min(𝑇−1,𝑥+ ) 2  (25) 
(𝑧+𝛼 ∑ 2 (𝑏𝑥

𝑐 𝑒,𝑓) )
𝑗=max(0,𝑥− )

2

Here, the 𝑁𝑥
𝑒,𝑓 represent the activity of normalization, consisting of 𝑏𝑥

𝑒,𝑓 number of neurons which 
are computed in position (𝑒, 𝑓) within the use of Kernel K. T is the total range within the layers, z,c, 
and 𝛼 are the given constants, which are hyperparameters of adjustable values through application 
of validation sets respectively. The soft-max is a classifier on top of the features extracted. After the 



45 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

performance of five series of CNNs, the output is then fed into the soft-max layer for the multi-
classification, which helps in determining the probabilities of the classification. These are, in turn, 
used by the final classification layer for classifying the input images into different classes. 

3.3.4.5. Dropout Layer 
This layer is then applied to the two layers, which are fully connected when the total count of 

the iterations gets doubled in the network to avoid the overfitting of data by substantially increasing 
the count of iterations by a factor of two, which makes the neurons dense. It then performs the 
average model along the neural network, which shows an efficient result in regularizing the data 
which are trained. The maximum number of layers that are used for pooling and the size of the kernel 
are processed in such a way that the output maps of the feature are down-sampled into a single pixel 
per map. Figure 3 then depicts the regularization of methods on layers that are fully connected prior 
to and after the dropout being applied. 

 

Figure 3: Fully Connected Layers (FC) before and after applying dropout 

The layers that are fully connected also get connected to the output of the top layers in a single-
dimensional vector. The upper layers are always fully connected to those of the output for a given 
class label, such that the high-level features are formed from the training data.  

3.4. Matching 
The targets of classification are determined for every anchor, which requires matching anchors 

for instances of ground truth. The common approaches include Greedy Bi-Partite (ex, which are 
based on Jaccard overlap) or many-one matching techniques where the Jaccard method is not used, 
but the matchings are kept discarded if the value of overlap is very low. Referring to these strategies, 
as bipartite or Argmax, the experiments use a throughput with given thresholds, which are suggested 
in the original work for every meta-architecture. Once the matching process is over, there is a typical 
sampling procedure which are designed for bringing the total count of positive anchors and the 
negative anchors in a desired ratio. In the experiments, recommended ratios are fixed for every meta-
architecture.  

 
4 Results and Discussion  

This section analyses the data that has been collected during the training and benchmarking, 
and sweeps over the model configurations. Every model included here is a choice of meta-
architectures with feature extractors stride (for Resnet and Inception), as well as the resolution of 
the input and number of proposals. These models were trained on some images scaled up to M 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 46 
 
 
number of pixels in the shorter edges whereas in SSD, these images are always resized to a particular 
shape defined by m*m. The evaluation models are then explored for down-scaled images to assess 
the accuracy and speed. In particular, these images are trained through different peaks of resolutions 
in each model. The experimental setup has M=600, and for high resolution and M is set to 300 for low 
resolution images. In either of the cases, it means that the SSD should at any time process only fewer 
pixels on average than a faster R-CNN, Alexnet, or R-FCN model that has all other variables which are 
held constant. The networks are then trained with the COCO data by making use of all training images 
as a substitute for image validation.  

For every model, the time is measured in GPU, and the memory required, precision, and recall 
are calculated. The most important ones are defined below. True positive indicates the correct 
detection of a ground-truth bounding box and is represented as TP. A false positive is the instances 
of incorrect detection of a non-existent object in an existing object. It is represented as FP. A False 
negative is the instances where the ground-truth bounding boxes are undetected. It is vital to note 
that in the context of object detection, a TN does not apply, as there is an infinite count of bounding 
boxes that need not be detected in a certain image. Assessment of the detection mechanism is 
normally based on the parameters such as precision P, recall R, and the same is represented as, 

𝑇𝑃 𝑇𝑃
𝑃 = =     (26) 

𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃 𝐴𝑙𝑙 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

𝑇𝑃 𝑇𝑃
𝑅 = =     (27) 

𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁 𝐴𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡ℎ𝑠

𝑃∗𝑅
𝐹 − 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 =  2     (28) 

𝑃+𝑅

Precision is considered the ability of a model it identifies each relevant object. It is the percentile 
of the accurate positive count of predictions. Recall is the model’s ability to understand and find all 
the cases that are relevant. It is calculated as the percentile of accurate predictions out of all the given 
truths. F-Measure denotes the harmonic mean of the precision and the recall together. In all the 
interpolations, it is seen that one can interpolate via all the points in such a way that are defined as 
follows, 

𝐴𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑙 = ∑𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1 − 𝑅𝑛)𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝(𝑅𝑛+1)    (29) 

𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝(𝑅𝑛+1) = max 𝑃( 𝑅̃)     (30) 
𝑅̃:𝑅̃≥𝑅𝑛+1

Here, instead of using the precision that is observed by the few points, the AP can now be 
obtained through the interpolated precision at every level, which takes the maximum amount of 
precision for measuring the accuracy in object detection in all the classes of a given database. The 
mAP is simply the average AP over all classes [4], [7], which is described as, 

1
𝑚𝐴𝑃 = ∑𝑁

𝑖= 𝐴𝑃 ( 1  
𝑁 1 𝑖    3 )



47 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

With 𝐴𝑃𝑖 being the AP in the ith class, and N is the total number of classes being evaluated. 
Figure 4(a-c) shows the input image, segmented image, and object detected of Air France. Figure 4(d-
f) shows the input image, segmented image, and object detected of pizza. 

   

(a) Air France image     (b) Segmented image   (c) Object detected in the Air France 

   

(d) Pizza image   (e) Segmented image   (f) Object detected pizza image 

Figure 4: Image Results 

 

Figure 5: Accuracy vs time comparison with respect to feature extractors 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 48 
 
 

Figure 5 shows some visualizations of the MAP in each of the classifiers along with feature 
extractors. It is seen from the results that it can be concluded that the proposed method, RCNN, and 
the AlexNet type of models are fast when compared to the R-FCN. In terms of accuracy, R-FCN holds 
an upper hand. When the GPU time is increased, AlexNET, with the aid of Resnet, the feature 
extraction has a greater Map than when compared to the inception of the Resnet extraction model. 
The proposed Resnet 101- Alexnet gives a higher mAP value of 54% for GPU time of 1000 
milliseconds, whereas other methods such as Inception Resnet-SSD, Inception Resnet-R-FCN, 
Inception Resnet-RCNN, Inception Resnet-Alexnet, Resnet 101-SSD, Resnet 101-R-FCN, and Resnet 
101-RCNN give mAP values of 35%, 37%,39%, 48%, 40%, 42% and 44% respectively. 

 

Figure 6: Accuracy stratified by object size, Meta-Architecture, and Feature extractor, Image resolution to 
300 

In Figure 6, the performance analysis is done on the different models with various sizes of 
objects. It is not surprising to see that all the methods perform better in the case of large objects. It 
can be concluded that the SSD techniques have meager performance in case of small objects and are 
competitive with faster RCNN and R-FCN in case of large objects, which outperforms these meta-
architectures for faster and lightweight extractors. The proposed Resnet 101- Alexnet gives a higher 
mAP value (Large) of 59.21%, whereas other methods such as Inception Resnet-SSD, Inception 
Resnet-R-FCN, Inception Resnet-RCNN, Inception Resnet-Alexnet, Resnet 101-SSD, Resnet 101-R-
FCN, and Resnet 101-RCNN give mAP values of 43.67%, 41.36%,46.58%, 55.12%, 45.32%, 47.21% 
and 50.15% respectively. 



49 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

 
Figure 7: GPU Time (Milliseconds) for each model, for image resolution of 300 

In Figure 7, a plot of GPU time for each of the models is shown. This has a constraint of platform 
dependency. The counting and floating-point operations provide us a platform-independent measure 
for the computation, which shall or shall not be linear with respect to the exact running cost and 
times owing to the number of issues such as caching, I/O, and optimization, etc. The GPU time of the 
proposed Alexnet and the Inception Resnet has a faster GPU time of the order of 42 and 36 
Milliseconds. 

 

Figure 8: Memory (Mb) usage for each model vs. feature extraction methods 

Figure 8 measures the total usage of memory other than the peak memory usage. These error bars 
reflect the variance in the usage of memory by the various proposals for faster R-CNN. The figure 
plots a few of the similar information in a more detailed manner by drilling down into the meta-
architecture and the feature extractor selections. It can be concluded from the figure that the 
proposed Alexnet with the Resnet 101 and the incent has a lower memory usage of the order of 1014 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 50 
 
 
MB and 428 MB, which has lesser usage when these are compared to the R-FCN and RCNN, 
respectively. 

 

Figure 9: Precision and Recall results comparison of each model vs. feature extraction methods 

Figure 9 shows the precision and recall comparison by using different numbers of proposals. From 
the figure, it is concluded that the proposed Alexnet with Resnet 101 and Inception Resnet has a 
higher precision value of 85.7143% and 75.63% whereas other methods, such as Inception Resnet-
SSD, Inception Resnet-R-FCN, Inception Resnet-RCNN, Restnet 101-SSD, Restnet 101-R-FCN, Restnet 
101-RCNN, have given precision values of 56.21%, 59.25%, 64.98%, 65.51%, 72.63% and 80.41% 
respectively. 

 

Figure 10: F- measure results comparison of each model vs. feature extraction methods 

Figure 10 shows the f-measure comparison by using different numbers of proposals. From the figure, 
it is concluded that the proposed Alexnet with Resnet 101 and Inception Resnet has a higher f-
measure value of 87.2727% and 78.575% whereas other methods, such as Inception Resnet-SSD, 
Inception Resnet-R-FCN, Inception Resnet-RCNN, Restnet 101-SSD, Restnet 101-R-FCN, Restnet 101-



51 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 
 

RCNN, have given f-measure values of 59.23%, 62.235%, 67.745%, 66.995%, 74.02% and 81.825% 
respectively. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
Object detection is one of the important and widely used methods for the identification of target 

objects in a specific image and for the determination of the position and category for achieving 
machine vision’s understanding. In this research, the dimensionality reduction is addressed using the 
BEMD technique for achieving high-order object detection that even in a low-dimensional space of 
dimension. The identification of the extrema in a two-dimensional image is carried out through 
searching for extreme values in eight different directions individually among various columns, rows, 
and diagonals as tabulated pixels. For each object detection, the methodology which are introduced 
is to minimize the combined effect of classification and the regression loss. Implementation of flexible 
and unified implementations are of four meta-architectures, R-FCNs s R-CNN, and Alexnet classifiers. 
AlexNet is designed in a deeper way than the standard CNN, with five CNNs followed by three pooling 
layers. The COCO detection is taken as a challenge that provides bounding box coordinates of more 
than 200,000 images with 80 object categories. This data is used for the comparison of results with 
other object detection methods. The performance metrics used are the Average precision (AP), Mean 
Average precision (mAP), the precision, and the recall with F-Measure. The results indicate that when 
fewer proposals are used, the Alexnet can speed up very fast without involving huge losses in terms 
of accuracy, and thus making it competitive with a faster R-FCN, SSD, and the RFCN. The proposed 
way of implementation does not require any modifications of the detection models for matching with 
different input formats and parameters that tune to object detection, and the same is left as the scope 
for future study. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: K. Reena; supervision and writing: A. Kalaivani; 
review and editing: T. Karthikeyan. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of 
the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Shine L, CV J. Automated detection of helmet on motorcyclists from traffic surveillance videos: a 

comparative analysis using hand-crafted features and CNN. Multimed Tools Appl. 2020;79(19):14179-99. 
2. Liu J, Yang Y, Lv S, Wang J, Chen H. Attention-based BiGRU-CNN for Chinese question classification. J 

Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput. 2019:1-2. 
3. Cao D, Zhu M, Gao L. An image caption method based on object detection. Multimed Tools Appl. 

2019;78(24):35329-50. 
4. Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal 

networks. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2015;28. 
5. Dai J, Li Y, He K, Sun J. R-fcn: Object detection via region-based fully convolutional networks. Adv Neural 

Inf Process Syst. 2016;29. 
6. Szegedy C, Reed S, Erhan D, Anguelov D, Ioffe S. Scalable, high-quality object detection. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1412.1441. 2014 Dec 3. 
7. Liu W, Anguelov D, Erhan D, Szegedy C, Reed S, Fu CY, Berg AC. Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In 

European conference on computer vision; 2016 Sep 17, 2016. p. 21-37. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):4 52 
 
 
8. Redmon J, Divvala S, Girshick R, Farhadi A. You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2016. p. 779-788. 
9. Lin TY, Maire M, Belongie S, Hays J, Perona P, Ramanan D, Dollár P, Zitnick CL. Microsoft coco: Common 

objects in context. In European conference on computer vision; 2014 Sep 6, 2014. p. 740-755. 
10. Bell S, Zitnick CL, Bala K, Girshick R. Inside-outside net: Detecting objects in context with skip pooling and 

recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition; 2016. p. 2874-2883. 

11. Erhan D, Szegedy C, Toshev A, Anguelov D. Scalable object detection using deep neural networks. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2014. p. 2147-2154. 

12. Fu CY, Liu W, Ranga A, Tyagi A, Berg AC. Dssd: Deconvolutional single shot detector. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1701.06659. 2017 Jan 23. 

13. Kim KH, Hong S, Roh B, Cheon Y, Park M. Pvanet: Deep but lightweight neural networks for real-time object 
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08021. 2016 Aug 29. 

14. Lin TY, Dollár P, Girshick R, He K, Hariharan B, Belongie S. Feature pyramid networks for object detection. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2017. p. 2117-2125. 

15. Shrivastava A, Gupta A, Girshick R. Training region-based object detectors with online hard example 
mining. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2016. p. 761-
769. 

16. Huang J, Rathod V, Sun C, Zhu M, Korattikara A, Fathi A, Fischer I, Wojna Z, Song Y, Guadarrama S, Murphy 
K. Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional object detectors. In Proceedings of the IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2017. p. 7310-7311. 

17. Wei W, Can T, Xin W, Yanhong L, Yongle H, Ji L. Image Object Recognition via Deep Feature‐Based Adaptive 
Joint Sparse Representation. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2019;2019(1):8258275. 

18. Lu M, Chen L. [Retracted] Efficient Object Detection Algorithm in Kitchen Appliance Scene Images Based 
on Deep Learning. Math Probl Eng. 2020;2020(1):6641491. 

19. Cao D, Chen Z, Gao L. An improved object detection algorithm based on multi-scaled and deformable 
convolutional neural networks. Hum-centric Comput Inf Sci. 2020;10(1):14. 

20. Zhang S, Zhang C, Wang Z, Kong W. Combining sparse representation and singular value decomposition 
for plant recognition. Appl Soft Comput. 2018;67:164-71. 

21. Du S, Liu T, Huang D, Li G. A fast and adaptive bi-dimensional empirical mode decomposition approach for 
filtering of workpiece surfaces using high-definition metrology. J Manuf Syst. 2018;46:247-63. 

22. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. 
Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2012;25.