ARTICLE 

Microarray-Based Cancer Classification via Optimized Gene Selection 
Using Evolutionary Population Strategies 

T. Saravanan1,*, Krishnaveni Sakkarapani2 and Siva Shankar Ramasamy3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Applications, MITS University. 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Data Analytics (PG), PSGR Krishnammal College for Women, Coimbatore, India. 
3International College of Digital Innovation, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 50200. 
*Corresponding Author: T. Saravanan. Email: drsaravanant.ml@gmail.com  

Received: 15 July 2025; Accepted: 11 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: In the enormous field of bioinformatics research, a large volume of genetic data has been 
generated. Higher throughput devices are made available at a lower cost, making the generate of huge 
volumetric data. Handling such numerous data has become an extremely challenging task for selecting the 
relevant disease-causing gene. The development of microarray technology provides a higher chance of cancer 
diagnosis, by enabling to measurement of the expression level of multiple genes at the same time. Selecting the 
relevant gene by using classifiers for the investigation of gene expression data is complicated. Proper 
identification of genes from the gene expression datasets plays a vital role in improving classification accuracy. 
In this study, the major task is identifying highly relevant genes from the gene expression data for cancer 
treatment. By using a modified meta-heuristic approach known as parallel lion optimization (PLOA) for 
selecting genes from microarray data that are able to classify various cancer sub-types with more accuracy. The 
experimental results depict that PLOA outperforms LOA and other well-known approaches, considering the 
five benchmark cancer gene expression datasets. It returns 99% classification accuracy for the dataset, namely 
Prostate, Lung, Leukemia, and Central Nervous System (CNS), for the top 200 genes. Prostate and Lymphoma 
dataset PLOA is 99.19% and 99.93% respectively. On evaluating the result with other algorithms, the higher 
level of accuracy in gene selection is achieved by the proposed algorithm. 

KEYWORDS: Cancer diagnosis, Parallel Lion Optimization, Gene Expression data, Genetic Algorithm, 
Classification. 

1 Introduction 
The death rate due to cancer is increasing in current days. Technology is fast-growing; there is a 

requirement for the detection and proper treatment of cancer. Microarray technology is gaining 
importance, where the expression of genes can be used to measure and classify cancer cells. 

 The microarray examination is a process where the RNA is mined and converted to mRNA, and 
cDNA is produced [1]. Both mRNA and cDNA are kept in a DNA microarray such that individual cDNA 
gets connected to its corresponding mRNA. Further, the image processing procedures are applied to 
identify the genes [2]. The samples are very less, and as the features are more, identification is the 
most motivating task. The main research is identifying the genes. Various methodologies for training 
the samples are available. Neural networks and machine learning approaches have been proposed. 
The dominant features of the gene to be selected, which help in accurate classification. The process 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



54 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 
 

may be classified into two stages. They are Feature selection and classification. The block diagram 
below shows the general model.  

There are many gene selection techniques available, like wrapper, filter. Microarray data may 
have relevant and irrelevant data, which indicates high dimensionality. Feature selection supports 
selecting features that help in classification. It is a methodology where the available data is grouped 
depending on the feature [3]. 

 
Figure 1: Block Diagram 

Various classification techniques, which are already available, are used, like k-NN, convolutional 
neural networks, etc. Amongst the approaches, hybrid methodologies are gaining importance, which 
makes the system accurate. This study discusses on Parallel Lion Optimization method for efficient 
gene selection rate has been experimented with by comparing various techniques in previous 
approaches. 

2 Literature Survey 
The multi-objective PSO [4] repeatedly executes the steps of calculation of fitness, after which 

non-dominant sorting is done. GBest, which is a random solution among the results, is selected. This 
was mainly tested for colon cancer, Lymphoma, and leukemia datasets. Classification, namely Bayes 
family classifiers, function-based classifier, k-NN classifier, and tree-based classifier, was used. This 
was mainly concentrated on analyzing gene data. The lion algorithm identifies the best solution, 
which mainly performs the generation of pride, mating, territorial defense, and territorial takeover. 
The algorithm is defined based on the lion's social behavior.  

Classification approach for micro data analysis [5] has two stages: feature selection, which is 
done with the help of embedded method, wrapper method, and filter method. Second are 
classifications for which neural networks and hybrid classifiers various as are used. There are other 
various approaches used, like gene classification, wavelet transformation, and swarm optimization, 
etc., where, depending on the feature, the technique can be implemented.  

Biography-based optimization [6] is a kind of wrapper method in feature selection. It mainly 
works using the principle of special migration and mutation. This mainly avoids redundancy and 
gives optimal results. Redundancy-based filter works by listing the features in decreasing order and 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 55 
 

removing the related features from all features. IG-GA and dependency of feature are also the hybrid 
approaches that use branch and bound, sequential forward process, respectively, and provide 
optimal results.  

Fuzzy approaches [7] are an order technique for feature selection. The fast algorithm initially 
removes irrelevant features and constructs the minimum spanning tree; it is partitioned based on 
the representative features. Bayes, C4.5 Ripper, and CFS classifier, along with this, give better results. 
There are various approaches for the detection of cancer using microarray data [8]. The simplified 
fuzzy ARTMAP, which uses cDNA microarray data for the identification of lymphoma. Gene 
expression graph represents the graph structure that relates silenced and expressed genes, where 
nodes are genes, and the edges represent gene expression relation [9]. Other approaches, like 
kernelized Fuzzy Rough set and semi-supervised SVM, which use biomarkers [10]. Transductive SYM 
adds the transductive samples to the original training set and continues the process of selecting and 
adding the transductive samples. 

3 Proposed Methodology 

3.1 Initialization 
In the initial step, Npop arrangements are created arbitrarily in the seek space. %N of produced 

arrangements are arbitrarily picked as migrant lions. The rest of the populace will be haphazardly 
partitioned into P prides. Every arrangement in this calculation has a particular orientation of sex 
and remains steady amid the streamlining process. To imitate this reality, in every pride %S (%75– 
%90) of the whole populace shaped at the end are referred to as females and the remaining as males. 
For wanderer lions, this proportion is the other way about %(1_S). Lion is spoken to as taking after 
[11]: 

Lion = [x1, x2 ,x3, …,xNvar]     (1) 

 
L2 L3 L4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . LN-3 LN-2 LN-1 LN 

 

0.36 0.91 0.19 0.39 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.78 0.61 0.24 0.09 

    . . . . . . . . . . . . .     

0 1 0 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 0 0 

 

Figure 2: Lion Representation in PLOA 

Figure 2 shows the gene representation of lion optimization. The integer higher than the 
maximum value is (0.50), and it will be 1, and the minimum value will be represented as 0. The genes 
set that have a value of 1 will be chosen for further optimization. 

 



56 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 
 

3.2 Hunting 
In each pride, some females search for prey in a gathering to give sustenance to their pride. These 

seekers have specific methodologies to round up the prey and catch it. As a rule, lions took after 
similar examples when chasing. The lions are partitioned into seven distinctive stalking parts. PREY 
will escape from the seeker, and the new position of PREY is obtained as follows: 

rand ((2 × PREY - Hunter), PREY), (2 × PREY - Hunter) < PREY
Hunter'=   (2) 

rand(PREY, (2 × PREY - Hunter)),  (2 × PREY - Hunter) > PREY
 

3.3 Moving Toward a Safe Place 
As specified in the previous subdivision, in all pride a few females go chasing. Left out females go 

toward one of the regions. Since the region of every pride comprises the individual best so far, places of 
every part and helps the Lion Optimization Algorithm (LOA) to save the best arrangements acquired so 
far, after completing the course of emphasis, it can be utilized as significant and reliable data to enhance 
arrangements in LOA. The female lion's new position might be meant as 

Female Lion’ = Female Lion + 2D × rand (0, 1) {R1} + U (− 1,1) × tan ( ) × {R2} {R1}. {R2} =   (3) 
0, ║ {R2} ║ 1    

3.4 Roaming 
Every male lion in a pride wander in that pride’s region because of a few reasons. To copy this 

conduct of occupant guys, the % R of pride in an area is chosen haphazardly and is governed by that lion. 
Along wandering, if an occupant male visits another position which is superior to anything its present 
best position, refresh its best went by arrangement. This wandering is a solid neighborhood inquiry and 
helps the Parallel Lion Optimization Algorithm (LOA) to look around for an answer to enhance it [12]. 

X ~ U (0, 2 × d)     (4) 

3.5 Mating Selection 
Mating is a basic procedure that guarantees the lions’ survival and gives a chance for data exchange 

among individuals. In each pride, %Ma of is female lions mate with one or a few inhabitant lions. These 
guys are chosen haphazardly from an indistinguishable pride from the female to deliver posterity. For 
traveler lions, it’s diverse in that a wanderer female just mates with one of the males who are chosen by 
utilizing a roulette wheel determination process. The mating administrator is a direct blend of guardians 
for delivering two new offspring. As indicated by the accompanying conditions, the new offspring are 
created after choosing the female lion and male(s) for mating. 
Roulette Wheel Selection 

The thought behind the roulette wheel choice parent choice strategy is that every individual is 
allowed to end up a parent to the extent of their wellness assessment. It is called roulette wheel 
determination as the odds of choosing a parent can be viewed as turning a roulette wheel, with the extent 
of the opening for each parent being relative to its wellness. Clearly, those with the biggest wellness (and 
opening sizes) have more possibilities of being picked. Roulette wheel determination can be executed as 
takes after  

a.: Sum the wellness of all the population individuals. Call this TF (add up to wellness).    
b. Generate a random number m in the vicinity of 0 and TF. 
c. Return the primary population part whose wellness added to the former populace individuals are 

more prominent than or equivalent to m. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 57 
 

 
Figure 3: A and B representation of defense against new mature and no male 

Figure 3 demonstrates the portrayal new developed occupant male choice. It is applied to the roulette 
wheel determination strategy rather than irregular choice. The issue with roulette wheel choice is that 
one part can overwhelm all the others and get chosen a great extent of times. The inverse is additionally 
valid. On the off chance that the calculation of the individuals will be close, then they will have a relatively 
measure up to possibility of being chosen [18]. To get around these issues, different wellness 
standardization methods can be applied. 

i
Offspring  FemaleLion (1−  )

 1 =  × j  + 
j     × 

NR MaleLion × 
j S i     (5) 

i=1S i

3.6 Defense 
In a pride, male lions, when they develop, they end up forceful and fight other males in their pride. 

Beaten guys desert their pride and turn into wanderers. Then again, if a wandering male lion is sufficiently 
strong to endeavor to assume control over a pride by fighting its males, the beaten inhabitant male lion is 
driven out of the pride and becomes a traveler. The resistance administrator is partitioned into two 
fundamental advances: defense with respect to new mature resident males and defense with respect to 
nomadic males. 

3.7 Migration 
Roused by the lion's switch life and transitory conduct in nature when one lion sets out starting with 

one pride then onto another or switches its mode of life and the inhabitant female moves toward 
becoming a traveler and the alternative way around, it improves the genetic variety of the objective pride 
by its situation in the past pride. Then again, the lion’s movement and switch mode of life assemble the 
scaffold for data trade.  

In each pride, the maximum number of females is prevented from being mined by S% of the 
population of the pride. For relocation administrators, some women chose arbitrarily and progress 
toward becoming wanderers. The size of the moved female in each pride is equivalent to surplus females 
in all prides, in addition to the maximum number of females in a pride. At the point when chosen females 
move from prides and move toward becoming migrants, new wanderer females and old traveler females 
are arranged by their fitness. At that point, the best females are chosen arbitrarily and dispersed to prides 
to fill the vacant place by moving females. This system keeps up the decent variety of the entire population 
and offers data among prides. 



58 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 
 

3.8 Convergence 
For the halting condition, as normally considered in enhancement calculations, the best outcome is 

computed where the ceasing condition might be accepted as the CPU time, the greatest number of 
emphases, the number of cycles without change, and so forth.  

The primary strides of the PLOA are condensed in the pseudo code. To perceive how PLOA can 
tackle enhancement issues, a few points might be noted: In PLOA, every arrangement has a specific sexual 
orientation, and every sex has its own particular system for looking. It helps PLOA to search for the ideal 
point by various methodologies [13]. The general point in utilizing a few prides is that each pride centers 
on a specific area and harmony between investigation and abuse. Its character of PLOA builds its ability 
to work for the enhancement of multi-modular issues. Traveler lions and their versatile wandering help 
PLOA to seek arrangement space haphazardly and escape from nearby optima. Individual best so far 
places of lions can give significant and solid data discovered so far by the populace. The proposed pride’s 
region PLOA to made the best arrangements so far to finish the sequence of the cycle. In PLOA, by mating, 
lions share data between sexual orientations, while new whelps acquire character from the two sexes. 
Occupant guys wandering help PLOA to misuse data from their separate pride’s neighbors that hold 
significant information. This method can be referred to as a solid neighborhood search. Specifically, the 
case ends up stale at a point. If best wellness esteem stagnates for a specific number of emphases in both 
the forests, then combine the whole population of lions in two timberlands and recently partition the 
prides and wanderers in light on their wellness value [14]. Figure 3 presents about the population 
relocation convergence in the dormant circumstance. The pseudo code portrays every progression in the 
Parallel Lion Optimization calculation amongst the two woodlands at the same time. 
Pseudo code of PLOA 

Begin 

Define the fitness function f (x), x = x1 , x2 , x3 ,..............xn 

Set the following parameters  

Number of Lions, Number of Iterations, Number of Prides, Female Prides, Male Prides, 
Female Nomads, Male Nomads, Immigration Rate, Mating Probability, Numbers of lions for 
mating and moving  

Define two forests and in each forest do the following steps in parallel  

1. Generate random population of Lions Npop 

2. Initialize prides and nomad lions within the population 

a. Randomly select N% of initial population as nomad lions. Randomly 
divide the remained lions into P prides and form each pride’s region 

b. In each pride S% of entire population are assumed as female lions and the 
remaining lions as males. 

c. In each nomad (100-S) % of complete population are identified as females 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 59 
 

and the left out as males. 

3. For each pride do 

a. Some female lions are randomly selected and go hunting 

b. Each of remained female lion in pride go near one of the best selected 
position from territory 

c. In pride group, for each resident male; R% of territory lions are randomly 
selected and checked. 

d. Select Ma% of female lions from pride using Roulette Wheel Selection 

e. Selected females in pride mate with one or several resident male. Do 
mutation with Mutation Probability Mu. New cubs become mature. Merge new off 
springs with prides  

f. Weakest male drive out from pride and become nomad 

      End For 

 Select some strongest male lions from nomad and go hunting 

4. For Nomad do 

a. Nomad lion (Both male and female) moving randomly in search space 

b. Select Ma% of females from nomad using Roulette Wheel Selection 

c. Selected nomad females mate with one of the best nomad male 

d. Do mating with Mating Probability Mu. New cubs become mature 

e. Merge new off springs with prides  

f. Selected prides randomly attacked by nomad male 

    End For 

5. For each pride do 

a. Selected females from Pride with Immigration rate I become nomad 

       End For 

6. Do 



60 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 
 

a. First based on their fitness vale each gender of the nomad lions is sorted. 
After that, the best females among them are selected and scattered to prides filling 
empty places of migrated females. 

b. With respect to maximum acceptable number of each gender, nomad 
lions with smallest fitness value will be detached. 

Find the overall best objective value from the whole population of lions 

If best fitness value stagnates for particular number of iterations in both the forests 

Merge the entire population of lions in two forests and newly divide the prides and 
nomads based on their fitness value 

End If 

If termination condition is not satisfied, then go to step 3. 

4 Analysis 

4.1 Datasets 
In this study, the cancer benchmark microarray datasets from Kent Ridge Biomedical Data 

Repository [15] (http://datam.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/datasets/krbd/) are used for of experimental study. 
For the evaluation of the proposed method, five binary-class microarray cancer datasets are taken. The 
details of the datasets are given in Table 1. The third and fourth column representing Class1 and Class2, 
respectively, specifies the count of samples denoted inside parentheses. To evaluate our proposed 
algorithm, accuracy as a fitness function is used. 

Table 1: Microarray gene expression datasets 

Name of the Dataset Number of Class1 Class2 Total 

Genes Samples 

Acute myeloid leukemia – Acute 7129 ALL (47) AML (25) 72 

lymphoblastic leukemia (AML-ALL) 

Prostate 12600 Normal (59) Tumor (77) 136 

Colon Tumor 2000 Tumor (40) Healthy (22) 62 

Lung Harvard2 12533 Adenocarcinoma Mesothelioma (31) 181 

(ADCA) (150) 

Diffuse large  7129 DLBCL (58) Follicular lymphoma 77 

B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) Harvard (FL) (19) 

 
As mentioned earlier, the T-statistics for all microarray data genes are calculated and ranked based 

on their values. In this study, PLOA is applied to select informative genes from the top-M ranked genes. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 61 
 

The kNN classifier is used as the classifier for the comparison of the performance of CSC. In this study, 
top-50, top-100, and top-200 genes are selected from the dataset by applying the T-statistic measure. 
Figure 4.1 shows PLOA convergence over 200 iterations on the Leukemia dataset with top 50, 100, and 
200 genes. 

Figures 4 depict the accuracy obtained for selected top 50, 100, and 200 genes from T-statistics for 
leukemia, prostate, colon, lung, and lymphoma datasets. The results depict that the proposed PLOA 
algorithm outperforms existing statistical methods and PLOA in all five cancer gene expression data 
sets. 

 
Figure 4: Convergence of the PLOA algorithm for the Leukemia Dataset 

4.2 Comparative Analysis 
We compared the efficiency of our approach with PSO, GA, and Harmony Search (HS). Table 2 

depicts the maximum accuracy in a 200-epoch run of each method for each data set in the top 200 
genes selection using the T-statistics measure. Seeing as the three benchmark methods are executing 
in the same experimental setup, inputs, and gene expression data. Therefore, the results are exactly 
accountable for comparison. The table of comparison shows that, compared to PSO, GA and HS have 
an obvious advantage. The proposed PLOA method results in 99% classification accuracy for 
Prostate, Lung Cancer, Michigan, and Lymphoma. For the Prostate dataset and Lymphoma outcome 
dataset, the classification accuracy obtained by the proposed classifier is 99.19% and 99.93% 
respectively. The results show that for most of the methods, the classification accuracy is dependent 
on the number of genes. When the number of genes increases, classification accuracy also increases. 
In terms of the correct rate, the search space of the solution capability of PLOA is better than the 
other three competitors. 

Table 2: Comparison of our proposed algorithm with some important methods 

Dataset PSO CS HBMO LOA PLOA 

Leukemia 83.51 90.34 88.55 92.22 96.12 

Lymphoma 99.35 99.93 99.52 94.21 99.93 

Lung 99.76 99.76 99.74 93.76 99.91 



62 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 
 

Prostate 88.50 87.66 88.37 91.45 99.19 

Colon 96.64 97.86 98.81 95.23 99.94 

4.3 Biological Analysis of Selected Genes for Leukemia Cancer Data 
At last, the most significant subsets of genes were detected for every microarray data set. We 

included all subsets having the maximum accuracy, as well as listed the selected genes. Table 3 lists 
the highest selection frequency for the top 5 genes of the leukemia microarray data set. The roles or 
activities of the identified genes are confirmed by both the biological experiment as well as by the 
PLOA-based method. This indicates that it has a greater chance to act as biomarkers; these genes 
have been demonstrated to be the potential reason for leukemia cancer. Table 3 denotes the top 5 
genes with the highest frequency in the leukemia data sets. 

Table 3: Top 5 genes with the highest selection frequency of the leukemia data set 

Dataset PSO GA HS LOA PLOA 

Leukemia 87.16 86.06 93.55 92.22 99.33 

Lymphoma 91.77 93.86 88.56 94.21 99.80 

Lung 90.33 93.87 96.62 93.76 99.19 

Prostate 89.44 91.58 90.96 91.45 99.81 

Colon 87.32 93.02 96.09 95.23 99.19 

5 Conclusion 
Microarray establishes the gene expression signatures associated with different phenotypes. 

Gene expression profiles are valuable to distinguish tumors into new and well-established tumor 
types. In this research, the meta-heuristic PLOA algorithm has been developed and implemented to 
select the informative genes from microarray data. An accuracy of classification is obtained by 
various eminent optimization algorithms like PSO, CS, HS, and LOA investigated. It is noticed that the 
genes selected by the PLOA for different cancer datasets have significant biological relevance. The 
result analysis acquired by the proposed algorithm is appropriate for the best gene selection, which 
has been evaluated with various gene expression benchmark datasets. The obtained accuracy by the 
PLOA method outperforms other methods. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: T. Saravanan; supervision and writing: 
Krishnaveni Sakkarapani; review and editing: Siva Shankar Ramasamy. All authors reviewed the 
results and approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):5 63 
 

References 
1. Agapito G, Arbitrio M. Microarray data analysis protocol. In Microarray Data Analysis, 2021 Dec 14, New 

York, NY: Springer US, 2021, p. 263-271. 
2. Negi A, Shukla A, Jaiswar A, Shrinet J, Jasrotia RS. Applications and challenges of microarray and RNA-

sequencing. Bioinformatics. 2022:91-103. 
3. Nayak DS, Mohapatra S, Al-Dabass D, Swarnkar T. Deep learning approaches for high dimension cancer 

microarray data feature prediction: A review. Comput Intell Cancer Diag. 2023:13-41. 
4. Cui Y, Meng X, Qiao J. A multi-objective particle swarm optimization algorithm based on two-archive 

mechanism. Appl Soft Comput. 2022;119:108532. 
5. Sánchez-Maroño N, Fontenla-Romero O, Pérez-Sánchez B. Classification of microarray data. In Microarray 

Bioinformatics, 2019 May 22, New York, NY: Springer New York, 2019, p. 185-205. 
6. Singh UP, Chandra S. Optimal cleaning schedule in solar PV using the biography-based helianthus 

optimization enabled coupled deep network. Sol Ener. 2023;266:112138. 
7. Das AK, Chakraborty B, Goswami S, Chakrabarti A. A fuzzy set-based approach for effective feature 

selection. Fuzzy Sets Syst. 2022;449:187-206. 
8. Khalsan M, Mu M, Al-Shamery ES, Ajit S, Machado LR, Agyeman MO. A novel fuzzy classifier model for cancer 

classification using gene expression data. IEEE Access. 2023;11:115161-78. 
9. Matias AL, Neto AR, Mattos CL, Gomes JP. A novel fuzzy ARTMAP with area of influence. Neurocomputing. 

2021;432:80-90. 
10. Wang R, Chen D, Kwong S. Fuzzy-rough-set-based active learning. IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst. 2013;22(6):1699-

704. 
11. Yazdani M, Jolai F. Lion optimization algorithm (LOA): a nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithm. J Comput 

Des Eng. 2016;3(1):24-36. 
12. Hussain I, Ullah I, Ali W, Muhammad G, Ali Z. Exploiting lion optimization algorithm for sustainable energy 

management system in industrial applications. Sustain Energy Technol Assess. 2022;52:102237. 
13. Sampathkumar A, Vivekanandan P. Gene selection using parallel lion optimization method in microarray 

data for cancer classification. J Med Imaging Health Infor. 2019;9(6):1294-300. 
14. Jiang K, Jiang M, Han Z, Wang F, Zhao Z. Research on the clustering competition coevolution optimization 

framework under the parallel lion swarm optimization algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2024 9th 
International Conference on Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 2024 May 10, New York, NY, USA, 
2024, p. 115-121. 

15. Mahmud MS, Fu X, Huang JZ, Masud MA. High-Dimensional Limited-Sample biomedical data classification 
using variational autoencoder. In Australasian conference on data mining, 2018 Nov 28, Singapore, 2018, 
p. 30-42.