ARTICLE 

Hybrid Recommendation Framework Combining Enhanced Density-
Based Clustering and Transductive Support Vector Learning 

V. Vasanthi1,*, M. Karthi2 and Sivakumar Vengusamy3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Information Technology, Hindusthan College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore - 
641028, India. 
2Professor, Department of Information Technology, Hindusthan College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore -641028, India. 
3Af Associate Professor, School of Computing, Asia Pacific University of Technology and Innovation (APU), Malaysia. 
*Corresponding Author: V. Vasanthi. Email: vasanthi.v@hicas.ac.in  

Received: 22 June 2025; Accepted: 14 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Recommendation Systems play a crucial role in improving business strategies and providing 
customers or users with the choice to opt for a product or service. Given the growth and power of information 
analytics tools and the inclination of data mining techniques, a wide range of recommender systems, 
particularly for web-based users, have evolved over the past decade. The conventional “One model – Fit for all” 
model fails in most cases due to the common fact that not all users have the same interests, and has paved the 
way for tailor-made recommender systems. It is hence highly important to provide a personalized framework 
that can accumulate the specific interests of the users. Web data are normally highly sparse in nature, and 
formulating a personalized user profile was a difficult task. The previous methods used user user-based CF 
method to address the former issue, while Extended Jaccard Similarity (EJS) was introduced to address the 
latter. Although these methods were found to be effective, there was scope for improvement in the Query 
processing time and accuracy. To solve this problem, the proposed system designs an Enhanced DBSCAN and 
TSVM-based hybrid recommendation scheme. In the proposed system, the user's interests and profile are 
analyzed by mining the web logs. After de-noising, user profile clustering is done through an improved DB scan, 
where Anarchic Society Optimization is used for parameter fine-tuning. The sequential pattern of the users has 
evolved based on the GSP approach. The user interests are then evaluated using the TSVM, which makes use of 
the weighted mean for the calculation of the trust value of the users. Lastly, the personalized recommendations 
are generated based on the clicks, selections, and browsing patterns. The proposed method is applied to MOVIE 
LENS data and found to perform better than the previous methods and other state-of-the-art recommendation 
models in terms of MAE, Speed, and Accuracy. 

KEYWORDS: Recommendation Systems, DBSCAN, Support Vector Machines (SVM), Anarchic Society 
Optimization (ASO), Extended Jaccard Similarity (EJS). 
  

1 Introduction 
In the digital era, with the rise in online web-based services, recommender systems play a crucial 

role in day-to-day life. Recommender systems touch every aspect of the online world, starting from 
e-commerce to online advertisements that target the interests of a specific type of user. Generically, 
recommender systems are the methodologies or the algorithms that aim to suggest the most relevant 
items or services to a particular user (ex, the movies to watch, the books to read, to choose a product, 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



65 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 
 

etc.) [1-2]. The recommender systems have evolved as a critical parameter in many industries, as 
they stand as vital in business expansion and acquisition of customers [3-4].  

Traditionally, recommender systems are categorized into collaborative and content-based 
filtering approaches [5-6]. The usage of the Hybrid approach has become more popular among 
researchers who combine the filtering approaches for increased performance. There are always 
many hindrances in combining these filter techniques [7-8]. Even the same type of techniques, when 
tried to hybridize face issues. Hybrid approaches are possible in many ways: by generating the 
recommendations through collaborative and content-based filtering and then combining the results, 
by incorporating the features of content-based filtering in collaborative filtering and vice versa, or by 
a unified approach that combines both methods. Various studies have proven that the hybrid 
approach outperforms better than the individual approaches [9]. These hybrid approaches are also 
proven to solve major issues such as data sparsity and user profile clustering. In short, the hybrid 
approach solves the bottleneck in knowledge engineering in various knowledge-based systems [10-
11].  

The previous methods used user user-based CF method to address the former issue, while 
Extended Jaccard Similarity (EJS) was introduced to address the latter. Although these methods were 
found to be effective, there was scope for improvement in the Query processing time and accuracy. 
To solve this problem, the proposed system designs an Enhanced DBSCAN and TSVM-based hybrid 
recommendation scheme. In the proposed system, the user's interests and profile are analyzed by 
mining the web logs. After de-noising, user profile clustering is done through an improved DB scan, 
where Anarchic Society Optimization is used for parameter fine-tuning. The sequential pattern of the 
users has evolved based on the GSP approach. The user interests are then evaluated using the TSVM, 
which makes use of the weighted mean for the calculation of the trust value of the users. Lastly, the 
personalized recommendations are generated based on the clicks, selections, and browsing patterns. 
The proposed method is applied to MOVIE LENS data and found to perform better than the previous 
methods and other state-of-the-art recommendation models in terms of MAE, Speed, and Accuracy. 

2 Literature Survey 
Wu-Yang et al (2019) proposed a methodology that combines Singular Value Decomposition 

(SVD) and Hybrid Collaborative Filtering for an effective and optimized solution for the data sparsity 
issue. The SVD is used for bringing in a reduction in user-view matrices that are obtained through 
web usage mining [12]. Both of the low-ranked matrices are then employed for generating item-
based and user-oriented predictions. An automated framework for building an automatic system in 
a real-time scenario is proposed. The recommendation engine performs in an online, real-time 
scenario. The experimental results through the MOVIE LENS data prove the efficiency of the proposed 
method.  

Hussein et al (2019) proposed the novel Hybrid framework, which builds complex and context-
aware solutions in online recommendation. The proposed method is based on the concept of dynamic 
conceptualization [13]. The proposed framework gives a range of algorithms for producing a set of 
recommendations or also known as templates, to combine various methods into hybrid 
recommenders. The proposed framework was also meant for integrating the existing user or product 
information from outside sources, such as social networks, MovieLens, etc. The hybrid method 
combines the extraordinary characteristics of state-of-the-art methods and Collaborative filtering 
methods. The evaluation is based on three conceptual foundations. The results indicate that the 
proposed method was efficient in terms of accuracy by reducing the loss and Mean Square error 
value.  

Shreya et al (2019) improved the quality of the Movie recommendation system through a Hybrid 
approach that combines both the CF models using SVM as a classifier. A genetic model is also 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 66 
 

proposed, and the comparative result showed significant improvement in terms of quality, 
scalability, and accuracy of the Movie recommendation [14].  

G M Sarene et al (2020) investigated that the performance of a recommender system is more 
affected due to over- and above specifications, data sparsity, and scalability. In order to mitigate some 
of the major negative effects, a hybrid system called the Relevance-based Recommender was 
introduced [15]. The proposed method exploits the individual measures in predictive relevance that 
are computed for every user for every instance of interest, which ensures high precision and recall 
values. Experimental results show that the advantages which are introduced through this 
recommender system have potential suggestions.  

J. Grivolla et al (2021) proposed a hybrid recommender system that integrates the demographics 
of users and the characteristics of the item set interactions [16]. The proposed system is then 
evaluated on the MOVIE Lens data, which includes gene information and the user data, which 
operates to provide a tailor-made discount to the customers. The proposed method included 
additional items and more information about the users, which has more information and impact on 
the quality of information, specifically where less interaction between the user profiles is available.  

Palit R et al (2020) provided a basic recommender system and how to implement it using the 
content and collaborative filter methods [17]. The proposed model takes the matrix of user ratings 
of movies as the top inputs, and recommendations are generated. The proposed method also 
discusses the hybrid or mixture of recommender models for effective recommendations. The 
experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.  

3 Proposed Methodology   
The Proposed methodology is shown in Figure 3.1 

3.1 Data preprocessing   
The system distinguishes various patterns of user style and behaviour during testing the 

browsing styles of users and taking out their server blogs. Normally, the log file might include various 
unnecessary behaviors in extremely short periods of time. Unfortunately, these behaviors might 
happen numerous times in a similar pattern. One more problem is that, in one pattern, it might 
include simply an action. These are between the noises to be removed from the beta version of 
sequential datasets. The noise finding and elimination steps are extremely significant since they be 
able to modify the result of information examination in the future. 

Algorithm 1: Denoised based on one source de-noising   

1. Given user u, content m, trial t=1,2,3, and > 0 
2. Rut ={𝑟1, … , 𝑟𝑘}(𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 ≠ 0 𝑓𝑜𝑟  𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑢 𝑖𝑛 𝑜𝑛𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙) 
3. 𝑅𝑢𝑡′ ={𝑟1, … , 𝑟𝑘}(𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 ≠ 0 𝑓𝑜𝑟  𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑢 𝑖𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙) 
4. Being 0 the value of the non-rated item 
5. for 𝑟𝑖 ∈ 𝑅𝑢𝑡 𝑑𝑜   
6. if 0< |𝑅𝑢𝑡(𝑚) − 𝑅𝑢𝑡′(𝑚) > 𝛾 then   
7. 𝑅𝑢𝑡(𝑚)=0(SD: we delete rating)  
8. 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒  𝑖𝑓 0 < |𝑅𝑢𝑡(𝑚) − 𝑅𝑢𝑡′(𝑚)| > 𝛾 (MD: ratings in both trials differ by less than a given 

threshold) then   
9.  𝑅𝑢𝑡(𝑚) = 𝑀(𝑅𝑢𝑡(𝑚), 𝑅𝑢𝑡′(𝑚)) 
10. else 



67 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 
 

11. 𝑅𝑢𝑡(𝑚) = 𝑅𝑢𝑡′(𝑚)  
12. end if  
13. end for  

 
Figure 1: Proposed Methodology 

In this work, if each one's rating differs by more than a specified threshold, there is a Strong 
Disagreement (SD) condition, and the rating is removed from the present dataset. At last, if at least 
two ratings are different by means of less than there is a Mild Disagreement (MD) condition. 

3.2 Clustering Module     
Recommendations should not be designed for the entire pool of users, but still for users by 

means of related specific interests; their ability to handle a task is able to differ appropriately toward 
variations in their information level. In the proposed work, a clustering technique is carried out as 
an initial step toward grouping users based on their browsing styles of the user. These groups are 
used to recognize logical choices in common sequences of user behaviors. Depending on the various 
patterns of browsing style and users’ behaviors, the clustering is carried out via the use of the 
DBSCAN clustering algorithm. 

DBSCAN is used to group similar kinds of user profiles. The DBSCAN method usually observes 
the user groups as dense regions of objects in the information space, with the purpose are dividing 
by means of regions of low-density objects. It generally has two parameters, such as Eps and MinPts, 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 68 
 

as inputs for grouping similar Users. From the following description, it simply requires finding out 
every one of the maximal densities connected spaces to cluster the users in a search space. These 
spaces are known as groups. Every user's data not contained in any group is measured as noise and 
be able to be ignored from the original Users. It makes use of the idea of density, such as reachability 
and connectivity. 

3.2.1 Density Reachability 
An users’ data at a point "p" is said toward be density reachable from a user data at a point "q" if point 

"p" is in ε distance from Users data at a point "q" and "q" has sufficient number of user data at points in 
its neighbors who are inside distance ε.   

3.2.2 Density Connectivity  
Users’ data at a point "p" and "q" are said in the direction of is density connected if there exist a users’ 

data at a point "r" which has sufficient number of Users’ data at a point in its neighbors and both the Users’ 
data at a points "p" and "q" are in the ε distance. This is sequence progression. So, if "q" is neighbor of 
Users’ data at a point "r", "r" is neighbor of Users’ data at a point "s", "s" is neighbor of Users’ data at a 
point "t" which in turn is neighbor of Users’ data at a point "p" implies with the purpose of Users’ data at 
a point "q" is neighbor of Users’ data at a point "p".  

Calculating the Parameters ε and Min Pts,  
The dynamic steps permit two input Users’ data points; the automatically created parameters differ 

in the direction of various Users’ data points. 
1. The distance between two Users’ data points 
The distance d (a, b) function measures the similarity of two Users’ data points.   

d (a, b)  =  q√(𝜇1|𝑋𝑎1 − 𝑋𝑏1 | 𝑞 + 𝜇2 |𝑋𝑎2 − 𝑋𝑏2| 𝑞 + ⋯ + 𝜇𝑝|𝑋𝑎𝑝 − 𝑋𝑏𝑝| 𝑞     (1) 
 

Where, a = (xa1, xa2, . . . ,xap) and b = (xb1,xb2, . . . ,xbp) are two p-dimensional Users’ data points, and q is 
a positive integer.    

2. Automatic parameters creation dynamic method 
The proposed DBSCAN algorithm discovers groups inside varied densities by creating multiple 

pairs of ε and MinPts routinely. 
 
Algorithm 1:   
 Let X = {x1, x2, x3... xn} be a set of Users’ data points (users). DBSCAN requires three parameters: 

ε (eps), similarity, and the smallest number of Users’ data points (users) necessary to form a cluster 
(minPts).    

Step 1: Start with an arbitrary starting Users data point with the purpose of has not been visited  
Step 2: Extract the neighborhood of this leaner’s data points using 𝜀.  
Step 3: If there is similar browsing style of user around this Users data points (user) then 

clustering process starts and Users data points is marked as visited  
Step 4: else Users data points is labeled as noise 
Step 5: if a user’s data points (user) is found to be a part of the cluster then its neighborhood is 

also the part of the group and the above procedure from step 2 is repeated for all 𝜀 neighborhood 
Users data points. This is repeated in anticipation of each and every one Users’ data points (users) in 
the group are found.  



69 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 
 

Step 6: A new visited Users’ data points (user) is retrieved and processed, leading in the direction 
of the discovery of a further cluster.    

Step 7: This process continues until each and every one Users data points (users) are marked as 
visited.   

The major issue with this clustering is that it needs to tune its two parameters ε and minPts. To 
solve this issue, these two parameters are tuned via the use of the Anarchic Society Optimization 
(ASO) algorithm [18]. Anarchic Society Optimization (ASO) is a new optimization method from 
swarm intelligence. Initially, several community parts are chosen randomly inside the search space 
for tuning of two parameters, ε and minPts. Then, the clustering accuracy of every part is calculated 
depending on the two parameters ε and minPts. According to the computed fitness value and 
comparison with 𝑋∗(k), 𝑃𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡and 𝐺𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡

𝑖 , the movement arrangement and a new value of the part will 
be found. After a sufficient number of iterations, at least one of the parts’ determinations reaches the 
optimal position of the cluster parameters.  

Algorithm 2: ASO Algorithm   
Input: N parts  
Output: Optimal parameters ε and minPts.    

1. Initialize the N parts, part position and set of iterations counter I=0  
2. Generate M initial solutions and evaluate their fitness values   
3. While (termination criteria are not satisfied)   
4. Determining the values of 𝑋∗(k), 𝑃𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡

𝑖  and, 𝐺𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡      
5. For i=1:M 
6. Computing FIi (k)  
7. If F𝐼𝑖 (k) is less than threshold 𝑋𝑖  (k), then 𝑋𝑖  (k) moves towards 𝑋∗(k)  
8. Else 𝑋𝑖  (k) moves towards a random part  

9. End if 
10. End for    
11. For i=1:M 
12. 12.Computing E𝐼𝑖 (k) 
13. 3.If E𝐼𝑖 (k) is less than threshold 𝑋𝑖  (k), then 𝑋𝑖  (k) moves towards 𝐺𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡    
14. 14.Else 𝑋𝑖  (k) moves towards a random part  
15. 15.End if & End for   
16. 17.For i=1:M 
17. 18.Computing IIi (k)    
18. 19.If IIi (k) is less than threshold 𝑋𝑖  (k), then 𝑋𝑖  (k) moves towards 𝑃𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡

𝑖  
19. 20.Else 𝑋𝑖  (k) moves towards a random part 
20. 21.End if & End for  
21. 23.For i=1:M 
22. 24. Updating the position by combining the movement arrangement 
23. Calculate the fitness values  
24. End for & End While while   
25. Report the best solution 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 70 
 

26. End     

3.3 Generalized Sequential Pattern (GSP)     
Users with different browsing styles have various arrangements of rehashed succession. 

Consequently, students were grouped based on their styles of the students and afterward personal 
conduct standards were found intended for each student through the utilization of the Generalized 
Sequential Pattern algorithm (GPS) [19]. The large GPS is proposed for comprehending continuous 
example mining issues. One route toward making use of the level-wise model is to initially find every 
single one of the continuous students in a style which is level-wise manner. This essentially accounts for 
the checking of events of every last one singleton part in the database. In this way, non-frequent items are 
expelled to channel the exchanges. At the end of the work, each exchange incorporates just the incessant 
parts it initially contained. This altered database is then given as a contribution toward the GSP 
calculation. This progression needs one to disregard the entire database. Various disregards of the 
database are finished by methods for the GSP Algorithm. In the primary pass, every single one particular 
thing (1 sequence) is tallied. Accordingly, from the found continuous things, a place of candidate 2-
sequences is made, and in this manner, pass is made to perceive their recurrence. These successive 2-
groupings are utilized to make the candidate 3-sequences, and this calculation is repeated until the point 
that no more frequent sequences are found. The calculation incorporates two noteworthy advances. 

3.3.1 Candidate Creation 
Specified the set of frequent (i-1) and their frequent sequences Fn(i-1), the candidates used for the 

next pass are created by combining Fn(i-1) by means of itself. As a minimum, one of whose subsequences 
is not frequent is removed by means of the pruning step. 

3.3.2 Pruning phase 
A pruning step removes some sequence at least one of whose series is not frequent.  

3.3.3 Support Counting 
Frequently, a hash tree–based search is proposed for capable support counting. Subsequently lastly 

non-non-maximal frequent sequences are removed. 

Algorithm   

1. Fn1 = the set of frequent 1-sequence  
2. i=2,   
3. do while Fn(ii-1)!=Null;  
4. Generate candidates sets Cni (set of candidates i sequences);  
5. For all i/p sequences Q in the database D do   
6. Raise count of all a in Cni if Q supports a Fni={a ∈ Cni such that its frequency exceeds the 

threshold} i=i+1; 
7. Result =Set of all recurrent sequences is the union of all Fnis   
8. End do  
9. END 

3.4 TSVM        
To know the Users’ data, the transductive support vector machine is proposed in this work. 

Depending on the percentage ideal answer, the Users’ rating is able to be explained, which is completed 



71 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 
 

in the direction of dividing the clustered users depending on the ratings of these frequent sequences [20]. 
TSVM is generally a continuous classifier that regularly finds the best hyperplane in the user’s space with 
a transductive procedure, with the purpose of including unlabeled samples in the training step.  

The browsing step of the TSVM can be designed as an optimization issue and described as follows: 

1
J(w, 𝜉,  𝜉∗)= ||𝑤||2+C∑𝑙

𝑖=1 𝜉 + 𝐶∗ ∑𝑑
2 𝑖 𝑗= 𝜉 ∗1 𝑗     (2) 

Will be focused on,   

𝑦𝑖(𝜑𝑋𝑖).w+b)≥ 1-𝜉 𝑖, 𝜉 𝑖 ≥ 0; 𝑖 = 1,2, … . 𝑙     (3) 

𝑦𝑗(𝜑𝑋𝑗).w+b)≥ 1-𝜉 ∗, 𝜉 ∗𝑗 𝑗 ≥ 0; 𝑖 = 1,2, … . 𝑑     (4) 

Where C and 𝐶∗- user mentioned a penalty value of together the training and the transductive 
samples 𝜉𝑖 , and 𝜉∗

𝑗  - random variables and d - total number of transductive samples. Training the 
TSVM relates in the direction of handling the above-mentioned issues. Lastly, the conclusion function 
of the TSVM with Lagrange multipliers 𝛼𝑖 and 𝛼∗

𝑗  are described as follows,   

f(x)= sgn [[∑𝑙 𝑑 ∗𝛼∗
𝑖= 𝑦𝑖𝛼𝑖𝑘(𝑥, 𝑥𝑖) + ∑𝑗=1 𝑦𝑗 𝑗 𝑘(𝑥, 𝑥∗

1 𝑗 + 𝑏)]    (5) 

If two Users were calculated by the system by means of the parallel rating designed for a comparable 
navigational series, then they are supposed to be similar. Recommendation procedure is able to be 
performed depending on these browsing styles, which is performed based on the Personalized Browsing 
Approach (PLA).    

3.5 Recommendation process          
The student preferences and browsing behavior be able to be described by means of the subsequent 

three ways: 
1. Clicks: This step is described as a small listing of material. 
2. Selection: This step is described as the material chosen and added to the cart. 
3. Browsing: This step is described as reading the material  
All of the above steps are used to recognize the Users' comparative preferences LPij used for every 

material referred from the information sources. The formula used to find the LPij is described as follows: 
𝐿𝑃𝑐 𝑐

𝐿𝑃 𝑖𝑗−𝑀𝑖𝑛1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗)
𝑖𝑗 =  

𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑐
1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗)−𝑀𝑖𝑛 𝑐

1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗)
 

 (6) 

 

 𝐿𝑃𝑐
𝑖𝑗, 𝐿𝑃𝑠

𝑖𝑗  and 𝐿𝑃𝑙
𝑖𝑗 describes the number of references toward material during clicks, selection, 

and browsing steps performed by the user ‘i' in the material ‘j’ correspondingly. 
𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑐

1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗), 𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑠
1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗), 𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑙

1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗) describes the highest no. of clicks, selections, 
and browsings performed by the User ‘i' in the material ‘M’. 𝑀𝑖𝑛 𝑐

1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗), 𝑀𝑖𝑛 𝑠
1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗) , 

𝑀𝑖𝑛 𝑙
1≤𝑗≤|𝑀|(𝐿𝑃𝑖𝑗) describes the lesser no. of clicks, selections, and browsing performed by the User ‘i' in 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 72 
 

the material ‘M’.  The proposed personalized recommendation system is used to improve users’ 
browsing knowledge.     

4 Experimental Results 
The experiment is deployed in Java with “Oracle Easy” as the Database. The performance chart of 

the proposed Enhanced DBSCAN and TSVM-based hybrid recommendation scheme is computed and 
distinguished from the existing state-of-the-art methods and from the previous methods. The present 
and proposed methods are distinguished with respect to query processing time, Mean absolute error 
(MAE) metric, and accuracy. The MOVIE LENS Data is used for an experimental purpose, which is open-
sourced and available from the data world. The proposed method, DBSCN: TSVM, is then compared 
with other state-of-the-art methods, such as K-Means Neural Network (KNN), DBSCAN, Simple Support 
Vector Machine (SVM), Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Collaborative Filter Partial Timing (CFPT), and 
Extended Jacard Similarity (EJS). 

 
Figure 2: Dataset 

The overall result analysis is shown in Table 4.1. 

Table 1: Result analysis 

Methods Processing Mean Absolute Error Accuracy 

Time in Ms 

KNN 0.92 0.96 0.69 

DBSCAN 0.86 0.82 0.78 

SVM 0.98 0.89 0.81 

ANN 0.72 0.76 0.83 

CFPT 0.68 0.62 0.79 

EJS 0.86 0.73 0.80 



73 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 
 

DBSCAN: TSVM 0.41 0.25 0.96 

4.1 Query Processing Time      
The query processing time is defined as the time taken for the recommendation set to be 

generated for a particular click, selection, or search operation by the user. The experiment was 
conducted with 100 users as the initial set, which was slowly increased to 100000 users in a similar 
environment. The average time taken is calculated for each instance and is recorded. Figure 4.2 
shows the comparative analysis of the query processing time of the proposed method with that of 
other state-of-the-art methods. 

 
Figure 3: Comparison of Query Processing Time 

Figure 3 represents the comparison chart of query processing time performance for the 
proposed Enhanced DBSCAN with TSVM-based hybrid recommendation and existing methods. The 
proposed system accomplished better output than the current system, which is proven in the 
experimental results. 

4.2 Mean Absolute Error (MAE) metric 
The MAE is figured by summing these total blunders of the N, which is proportional to ratings– 

forecast matches, and afterward calculating the normal esteem. For each combination, <pi, qi> of 
anticipated appraisals pi and the genuine evaluations qi, this metric yields the supreme blunder 
among them, i.e., | pi-qi |. To figure the measurable exactness, the MAE metric is used, which is a 
calculation of the suggestions' deviations from their actual user-indicated values. Formally, 

 MAE= (∑𝑁
𝑖=1 |𝑝𝑖 − 𝑞𝑖|)/𝑁                         (7) 

Figure 4 represents the comparison output of the proposed enhanced DBSCAN and TSVM-based 
hybrid recommendation, existing DBSCAN with SVM-based hybrid recommendation, and trust-based 
hybrid recommendation strategy with respect to MAE. The designed system accomplished better 
output than the current system, which is proven in the experimental results. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 74 
 

 
Figure 4: MAE comparison 

4.3 Accuracy comparison 
The accuracy is calculated by initially calculating the True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), 

False Positive (FP), and False Negative (FN), and through the calculation as shown below, 

 Accuracy = TP + TN / TP+TN+FP+FN  (8) 

Figure 5 represents a comparison of the accuracy performance for the proposed Enhanced 
DBSCAN with TSVM-based hybrid recommendation and existing methods. It is found that the 
proposed method outperforms the existing methods with an accuracy of 96%. 

 
Figure 5: Accuracy comparison 



75 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 
 

5 Conclusion 
The recommender system framework is provided for a personalized item recommendation, 

specifically giving the recommendations to help Users identify and choose the effective information. 
In our work, clustering is done by the Enhanced DBSCAN algorithm, which works according to the 
browsing style of the Users. Then the TSVM algorithm computes the Users’ evaluation based on their 
habits and their interests. The student preferences and browsing behavior be able to be described by 
means of the subsequent three ways, like clicks, selections, and browsing. Finally, the experimental 
result shows that the designed system accomplishes good output when distinguished from the 
current system with respect to Processing time. MAE metric and accuracy. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: V. Vasanthi; supervision and writing: M. Karthi; 
review and editing: Sivakumar Vengusamy. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final 
version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Burke R. Hybrid web recommender systems. The adaptive web: methods and strategies of web 

personalization. 2007:377-408. 
2. Nagowah SD, Rajarai K, Lallmahamood MM. A hybrid approach for recommender systems in a proximity 

based social network. In International Conference on Emerging Trends in Electrical, Electronic and 
Communications Engineering; 2018 Nov 28, 2018. p. 302-312. 

3. Patel AA, Dharwa JN. An integrated hybrid recommendation model using graph database. In 2016 
International Conference on ICT in Business Industry & Government (ICTBIG); 2016 Nov 18, Indore, India; 
2016. p. 1-5. 

4. Aggarwal CC. Ensemble-based and hybrid recommender systems. In Recommender Systems: The 
Textbook 2016. p. 199-224. 

5. Lin CY, Wang LC, Tsai KH. Hybrid real-time matrix factorization for implicit feedback recommendation 
systems. IEEE Access. 2018;6:21369-80. 

6. Bezerra B, de AT de Carvalho F. A symbolic hybrid approach to face the new user problem in recommender 
systems. In Australasian Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence; 2004 Dec 4, Berlin; 2004. p. 1011-
1016. 

7. Yang Y, Jang HJ, Kim B. A hybrid recommender system for sequential recommendation: combining 
similarity models with markov chains. IEEE Access. 2020;8:190136-46. 

8. Nieves EH. RETRACTED CHAPTER: New Approach to Recommend Banking Products Through a Hybrid 
Recommender System. In International Symposium on Ambient Intelligence; 2020 Jun 17, 2020. p. 262-
266. 

9. Patro SG, Mishra BK, Panda SK, Kumar R, Long HV, Taniar D, Priyadarshini I. A hybrid action-related K-
nearest neighbour (HAR-KNN) approach for recommendation systems. IEEE Access. 2020;8:90978-91. 

10. Shirude SB, Kolhe SR. Improved hybrid approach of filtering using classified library resources in 
recommender system. In Intelligent Computing Paradigm: Recent Trends; 2019 Apr 24, Singapore; 2019. 
p. 1-10. 

11. Huang Z, Yu C, Ni J, Liu H, Zeng C, Tang Y. An efficient hybrid recommendation model with deep neural 
networks. IEEE access. 2019;7:137900-12. 

12. Yuan-hong W, Xiao-qiu T. A real-time recommender system based on hybrid collaborative filtering. In 
2010 5th International Conference on Computer Science & Education; 2010 Aug 24, Hefei, China; 2010. p. 
1909-1912. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):6 76 
 

13. Hussein T, Linder T, Gaulke W, Ziegler J. Hybreed: A software framework for developing context-aware 
hybrid recommender systems. User Model User-Adapt Interact. 2014;24(1):121-74. 

14. Agrawal S, Jain P. An improved approach for movie recommendation system. In 2017 international 
conference on I-SMAC (IoT in social, mobile, analytics and cloud) (I-SMAC); 2017 Feb 10, Palladam, India; 
2017. p. 336-342. 

15. Sarnè GM. A novel hybrid approach improving effectiveness of recommender systems. J Intell Inf Syst. 
2015;44(3):397-414. 

16. Grivolla J, Campo D, Sonsona M, Pulido JM, Badia T. A hybrid recommender combining user, item and 
interaction data. In 2014 international conference on computational science and computational 
intelligence; 2014 Mar 10, Las Vegas, NV, USA; 2014. p. 297-301. 

17. Palit R, Chatterjee R. Recommender system using K-nearest neighbors and singular value decomposition 
algorithms: A hybrid approach. In Progress in Computing, Analytics and Networking: Proceedings of 
ICCAN; 2020 Mar 27, Singapore; 2020. p. 497-504. 

18. Dooms S, De Pessemier T, Martens L. Online optimization for user-specific hybrid recommender systems. 
Multimed Tools Appl. 2015;74(24):11297-329. 

19. Li R, Zhu H, Fan L, Song X. Hybrid deep framework for group event recommendation. IEEE Access. 
2019;8:4775-84. 

20. Gabriel De Souza PM, Jannach D, Da Cunha AM. Contextual hybrid session-based news recommendation 
with recurrent neural networks. IEEE access. 2019;7:169185-203.