ARTICLE 

Exploratory Study of Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Detecting Milk 
Adulteration in Food Safety 

Sulochana V1,*, S. Prabhu2 and Basheer Riskhan3 

1Associate Professor, Department of Computer Science, Hindusthan College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore - 641028, 
India. 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, KG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore - 641035, India. 
3Dean and Associate Professor, School of Computing and Informatics, Albukhary International University, Malaysia. 
*Corresponding Author: Sulochana V. Email: sulochana.v@hicas.ac.in  

Received: 06 August; Accepted: 17 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Food adultery is the process where the quality is compromised by adding certain chemicals or 
other substitutions, which, when consumed, cause health hazards. The process includes not only the purposeful 
addition of additives but also the contamination occurring in the growing stage, storage, and when distributed. 
Adulteration has become a big business. We belong to a land where our ancestors taught that “food is medicine. 
Milk is one of the important foods consumed irrespective of age that ranging from infants to old people. In 
contrast, in the recent business era, milk is getting adulterated in more complicated ways that bypass the 
normal tests, and hence, there is a huge demand for a cutting-edge technology for detecting the same. The 
application of Artificial Intelligence has emerged in many diverse fields, not limited to the identification of food 
adulteration. This paper gives a gist of the most significant research that has been carried on in the detection 
of adulterated food, particularly milk, using the techniques of machine learning. Special attention is kept on the 
Machine Learning techniques that are designed specifically to detect milk adulteration. 

KEYWORDS: Adulteration, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Contamination. 
 

1 Introduction 
The adulteration of milk and other dairy products has grabbed the attention globally after the 

identification of melamine particles in milk in Chinese products in the year 2018 [1]. The practice of 
milk adultery is a very old scenario. The milk scandal that was reported in the year 1850 caused 
nearly 8000 infants to lose their lives in the city of New York. Milk is one of the chiefs and most used 
food items and has nutrients required for all ages of humans. It is also a rich source of many essential 
minerals and proteins. Milk is subject to adultery easily across the globe. The prime reasons behind 
this are the gap between supply and demand and high business motives. This also occurs due to the 
affordability of the customers to buy and the lack of efficient mechanisms to detect the same [2]. 
Although the motive is economic, the impact the adultery costs lives [3]. The situation is 
unmanageable in most of the underdeveloped and developing countries owing to the lack of efficient 
mechanisms and proper laws to enforce strict action against the culprits. Adulteration of milk can be 
identified either using qualitative or quantitative mechanisms. The former uses various chemical 
reactions for the purpose, and the latter identifies the nature of the adulterants. Milk adulteration 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



78 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 
 

detection methods need a swift transition from old manual methods to highly accurate machine-
based techniques [4].  

Food Safety policies and tools have been generated and are being it in all over the world. On 
adopting the available tools, still, many challenges still arise in various aspects, such as the accuracy 
of contamination prediction. The issue of food adulteration is a contemporary mechanism, and it is 
as old as the food production techniques themselves. Owing to the lower accuracy and time 
complexity involved in the conventional methods of identifying milk adultery, modern scientific 
development is needed, and since there are a large variety and complex information available on this, 
many data mining techniques in terms of supervised [5] and unsupervised models have been 
employed. Those models focus on the microbiological or toxic chemical hazards. The ultimate goal of 
the study is to examine the data mining technique employed for food adulteration and contamination. 
The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows: Section 2 gives the preliminaries on 
the types of machine learning, and Section 3 gives the best research works carried out on each of 
them, with the methods, advantages, and the area for improvement. Section 4 gives a comparative 
study on the results obtained through the methods adopted in the literature, and the conclusion and 
future directions are projected in Section 5.   

2 Preliminaries 

2.1 Machine Learning 
Machine Learning is the buzzword in the current digital era. The important reason behind this 

is the increase in data accumulation and a parallel increase in computational powers and hardware 
capacities. ML is almost used everywhere, from automation to producing intelligent decisions in 
almost every domain [6]. The ML methods have hit the floor in such a way that the users themselves 
would have already been using the devices without their understanding. ML techniques are those 
that enable the system to learn from the Data and improve its performance itself without being given 
explicit programming. ML is a category of algorithms that allows the application software to be more 
accurate in the process of outcome prediction without additional programming [7]. The basic intent 
of ML methods is to constitute algorithms that can get data as input and use various statistical 
methods for predicting the output as and when new data are accumulated. 

2.2 Types 
Machine Learning algorithms are more generally classified as supervised, unsupervised, and 

reinforcement learning [8].  
In the case of supervised methods, the system is given the data along with the labels, which 

indicate that all the data are tagged correctly with the label. The motive is to make the mapping 
function appropriate such that when we have X as the input data, the output Y can be predicted. The 
important methods of supervised learning are i. Classification where the output variable is of any of 
the categories, such as “color”, “shape”, or simple YES or NO, and the other methods are the regression 
models.  

As the unsupervised learning is considered, the Artificial Intelligence systems here are presented 
with data that are not labelled and which are not categorized, and the algorithms act upon the data 
without training. The output here is dependent on the algorithms, which are pre-coded. Using 
unsupervised learning is a kind of testing of the AI systems. The unsupervised learning is normally 
classified as i. clustering, where the intention is to discover under which group a particular entity 
falls, and ii. An association where the intention is to identify the rules that describe a large part of the 
data, such that “customers who bought X are likely to buy Y also”.  



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 79 
 

A reinforcement learning method is where the agent interacts with the environment for learning 
purposes. The agents here get the rewards if they perform correctly and penalties if they malfunction. 
The agent here learns without the influence of the human for maximum rewards and minimum 
penalty [9]. This is also considered a dynamic programming, which trains the algorithms to use a 
system of rewards and penalties. The commonly used methods are i. Q-Learning, which is considered 
to be an offshore policy learning, where the algorithm seeks to identify the best-fit action to be 
performed if the current state is given. It is termed offshore because the systems’ actions are outside 
the present policy, such that random actions. ii. Deep learning, where the ML techniques use multiple 
level of layers for progress through high-level features from the input. For instance, in the image 
processing domain, the low level may identify edges and the high levels identify the core concepts 
that are relevant to humans, such as digits or letters. Figure 1 gives a generalized view of the 
classification of ML techniques. 

 
Figure 1: Generic classification of ML methods 

3 Studies on Ml methods in food adulteration 

3.1 Review of supervised learning in food adulteration detection 
Wabben et al [10] proved that the concurrent use of both targeted and untargeted models, which 

are applied to the FT-IR spectrum in identifying milk adultery, is efficient. By the use of appropriate 
methods, the detection limits, sensitivity, and specificity are identified. The proposed model used a 
multivariate linear regression model for the practical implications of the method. The theoretical 
limitations are also provided for a potential range of adulterants used. The performance metrics used 
here are the Precision, F-score, and Recall.  

Zhang et al [11] proposed a series of samples of adulterated milk by adding different levels of 
aqueous dextrin. The improvised Support Vector Machines are used for the purpose of building the 
classification model for differentiating the milk that was adulterated based on the NIR spectrum of 
various sample sets. Uniformity in the design of tables was made use of. The results showed that the 
milks in which the adultered content is greater than 5 % are well detected by the proposed SVM 
combined with NIR based spectroscopy, with a very high validation ratio. The proposed methods 
outperformed other methods in terms of Specificity, Sensitivity, and Correlation values.  

Neto et al (2019) introduced the ML algorithms on milk spatial data. The proposed methods 
were able to find the most common adulteration methods that prevail in the dairy industry. Both 
classification and linear regression methods were used for the binary and multiclass means of 
classification, and the experimental results were compared. The proposed classification and 
regression methods were able to perform better than the FITR device and also the other traditional 



80 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 
 

methods of dairy manufacturing. The performance measures included the cosine value and the 
correlation.  

Mahood et al (2017) developed a new infrared-based spectroscopy (NIR), which is combined 
with that of the multivariate linear regression for identifying the level of formalin in cows’ milk. The 
methods, such as PCA and partial test regression (PCA), are applied for a statistical investigation of 
the NIR data. The PLS-NIR methods were used for checking the difference between the pure and 
adulterated milk. A regression model using PLS was built for quantifying the formalin levels in milk.  
The proposed method used Entropy, F Score, Precision, and recall as the performance measures.  

Rebechi et al (2016) conducted research to test for accuracy in the fatty acid for the detection of 
adulterants, which replaced milk fat with that of animal fat, and also proposed a regression model for 
the evaluation of this kind of adulterant. On every adulterant, the Multiple Linear model of regression 
(MLR) was implied by choosing a model, and later it was validated. The matrix between the 
calibrations and validation is constructed by implementing a genuine mechanism to differentiate 
between pure and adultered milk. The proposed models were able to find the milk adulteration at 
levels which are greater than 10%. The proposed method was better in terms of Specificity, 
Sensitivity, and Entropy when compared to other techniques.  

Table 1 shows the tabular description of the most important research carried out using 
supervised ML methods for milk adulteration detection. 

Table 1: Review of supervised methods 

Author(s) Method Advantages Metrics 

Wabben et FT-IR Spectra Identification of Potential F score, Precision, Recall 

al Adulterants 

Zhang et al Improved v-support vector Accuracy increased to 5% Specificity and Sensitivity, 

machines Correlation 

Neto et al Principle component analysis Outperforms traditional FITR Cosine similarity and 

(PCA) correlation 

Mahood et Partial least discriminant Identifies Formalin Adulterant Entropy, F Score, Precision, and 

al analysis Recall 

Rebechi et Multiple Linear Regression Accuracy increase over 10% Specificity, Sensitivity, Entropy 

al 

 
Roney et al (2015) investigated the effect of Raman Microscopy and the ANN as a practical means 

of assessing fluid milk by the addition of whey to it. The Quantitative findings of adulteration were 
done through the feed-forward ANN. Various configurations of the Neural Networks were made and 
are evaluated based on their coefficient. The proposed model observed that the data from both 
training and validation had a high value for Recall, such as 99.9% which proved that the combined 
method of ANN and the Raman spectroscopy is a very fast, simple, and efficient method for the 
identification of quality milk from being adulterated by whey. The model outperformed others in 
terms of Root Mean Square and Average area under the curve.  

Jiang et al (2019) made an attempt to develop an integrated mechanism that used least-square 
SVMs with the NMR technique for the identification of the level of adulteration in milk powder. It is 
proven that the proposed model can better identify adulterated milk. The experimental results prove 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 81 
 

that the proposed SVM-NMR can yield very high and dense clusters with an accuracy of more than 
98%. The proposed method used F Score, Precision, and recall as its performance metrics.  

Hsieh et al (2011) implemented the LS-SVM method for the calibration and also a prediction 
model to identify adulteration in the cows’ milk. The grid-based search technique was used to arrive 
at a better value for the Network parameters. The graph from the results shows that the adulteration 
ratio of above 10% is very well distinguished from those that are pure. The proposed method uses F-
score, Precision, and Recall as its performance metrics.  

Kuswandi et al (2015) made use of a couple of datasets that were recorded using the FTIR means 
of Spectroscopy using the total attenuated reflection (ATR) based on the spectrum data. The chemical 
analysis was made using the various modelling methods, such as LDA, SMCA, and SVM, on the data. 
At last, the optimum results of the models in the data set on the analysis of milk adulteration were 
selected, and the best-fit model was compared with the famous ELISA method. The proposed method 
seemed more efficient than that of the ELISA model in terms of Specificity, Sensitivity, and 
Correlation. 

Leonardi et al (2015) discussed the ML method, which aims the define in order to assess the 
authenticity of some high-value milk powders. It was also demonstrated that the classification’s 
effectiveness is very high in the proposed model in terms of the ability to exploit features on the 
chemical profile of milk that are obtained from biochemical methods. The proposed method was 
found to be more efficient when applied to real-time data and with synthetic data generated from a 
Bayesian generative model.  

Table 2 shows the gist of research carried out using unsupervised learning for milk adultery 
identification with the metrics used. 

Table 2: Review of unsupervised methods 

Author(s) Method Advantages Metrics 

Roney et al Artificial neural network Simple and efficient Root mean square and Average area 

under the curve 

Jiang et al Least-squares support Accuracy is 98% F score, Precision, Recall 

vector machine 

Hsieh et al Grid search SVM Accuracy increases by 10% Specificity and Sensitivity, 

Correlation 

Kuswandi et Fourier Transform Better than the ELISA method Cosine similarity and correlation 

al Infrared (FTIR) 

Leonardi et Bayesian network model Identifies Chemical ingredients Entropy, F Score, Precision, and 

al in a better way Recall 

3.2 Review on reinforcement learning for food adulteration 
Lei-Hong et al (2019) provided a solution for the automatic identification of common beetle 

species that frequently contaminate milk products. The approach was based on the convolutional 
neural network, which trained a dataset having 6900 images of various elytra fragments. The 
proposed methods acquired an accuracy level of 83% when cross-validated. It is also to be noted that 
the performance of the classification is obtained without the need to design and select the images 
that are domain specific, which depicts the deep learning importance in milk adultery. The proposed 
methods produced better results in terms of Root mean square and Average area under the curve. 



82 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 
 

Al-Sarayreh et al (2018) investigated the accuracy of hyperspectral imaging for the 
authentication and classification of fresh samples of milk. These samples are acquired from goat, cow, 
and buffalo milk. A 3-dimensional artificial neural network was proposed for the extraction of 
spectral features of the milk. A comparison was also made on the proposed methods with that of the 
existing methods, including the least square discrimination methods and SVM methods. The results 
prove that the 3D-ANN performs better in terms of F-score, Precision, and Recall than other methods.  

Jayanthi et al (2019) introduced a system that used a histogram of the gradients along with the 
SVM classifier for the detection of fungus in milk. The features of the milk species are captured using 
real-time cameras and are extracted by the Gradients Algorithm. The features are then fed to the 
ensemble SVM classification algorithm, which compares with the trained and projects the quality of 
the samples. The proposed method is implemented using the ARM processor. Experimental results 
prove that the proposed methods produce very good results in terms of Specificity and Sensitivity.  

Mahdi et al (2018) evaluated the portable system that is intelligent in identifying adulteration in 
milk using the machine-based vision method. The evaluation was done on 13 samples of milk and the 
mixed ingredients. For the identification of adulteration, the ANNs were deployed and evaluated 
using a hidden layer with the count of neurons starting from 1 to 20. The best fit network having the 
structure 12-6-7 is provided for the prediction of the samples with R as the coefficient of correlation 
and MSE. The proposed methods are found to be effective in terms of Cosine similarity and 
correlation. 

SanaJawaid et al (2017) introduced the SB-ATR-based Fourier transformation as a tool to 
identify the adulteration in milk. This proposed method is specifically used to test the melanin 
content in milk. The PLS model was incorporated for identifying the correlation of the data spectrum 
to melanin concentration. Deep neural networks were deployed to classify pure from impure milk. 
The proposed technique also took very little time for setup and running time. The performance 
metrics used here are Entropy, F-Score, Precision, and Recall. 

Table 3 shows the gist of research carried out using reinforcement learning for milk adultery 
identification with the metrics used. 

Table 3: Review on reinforcement learning 

Author(s) Method Advantages Metrics 

Lei-Hong et al Convolutional neural Cross-Validated accuracy of 84% Root mean square and Average 

network area under the curve 

Al-Sarayreh et 3D convolution neural spectral-spatial learned features F score, Precision, Recall 

al network (CNN) of milk are classified 

Jayanthi et al SVM classifier Real-time capture of fungus Specificity and Sensitivity, 

growth Correlation 

Mahdi et Artificial Neural Network More samples also yield good Cosine similarity and correlation 

al(2018) (ANN) results 

SanaJawaid et Partial least-squares (PLS) Very little time complexity Entropy, F Score, Precision, and 

al model Recall 

 

4 Comparative Analysis 
The graphical representation shows the comparative analysis of the metrics tabulated in each 

section and which are obtained from the results of various methods. These graphs are self-



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 83 
 

explanatory and are intended to produce a visual comparative analysis. Figure 2 shows the graphical 
representation of the various results obtained through the methods discussed in Section 3. 

 

  

 

Figure 2: Comparison of unsupervised methods, supervised methods, and reinforcement methods. 

5 Conclusion 
Food adultery is the process where the quality is compromised by adding certain chemicals or 

other substitutions, which, when consumed, cause health hazards. The process includes not only the 
purposeful addition of additives but also the contamination occurring in the growing stage, storage, 
and when distributed. Milk is the most common food product being adulterated. Although many 
studies have been carried out to bring out an accurate method for the detection of adulteration in 
milk, the usage of Machine Learning in the domain was very limited. This paper gives the gist of such 
few studies using Machine Learning methods for Milk adulteration detection. This gives an insight 
into the future research that can be pursued to solve the burning issue of milk adulteration and to 
save humans from fatal diseases.   

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 



84 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 
 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: Sulochana V; supervision and writing: S. 
Prabhu; review and editing: Basheer Riskhan. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final 
version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Food Adulteration - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics", Sciencedirect.com, 2018. [Online] .[Accessed: 14- 

Aug- 2018]. 
2. Adulteration and Harmful effects of Food Adulteration", India Study Channel, 2018. [Online].  
3. PressReader.com - Connecting People Through News", Pressreader.com, 2018. [Online]. 
4. Simon A, Deo MS, Venkatesan S, Babu DR. An overview of machine learning and its applications. Int J Electr 

Eng. 2016;1(1):22-4. 
5. Bowles M. Machine Learning with Spark and Python: Essential Techniques for Predictive Analytics. John 

Wiley & Sons; 2019. 
6. Kotsiantis SB, Zaharakis I, Pintelas P. Supervised machine learning: A review of classification techniques. 

Emerging artificial intelligence applications in computer engineering. 2007;160(1):3-24. 
7. Rokach L, Maimon O. Top-down induction of decision trees classifiers-a survey. IEEE Trans Syst Man 

Cybern. 2005;35(4):476-87. 
8. Al-Hmouz A, Shen J, Yan J. A machine learning based framework for adaptive mobile learning. In 

International Conference on Web-Based Learning; 2009 Aug 19, Berlin; 2019. p. 34-43. 
9. Stern D, nonero Candela JQ. Playing machines: Machine learning applications in computer games. CIG. 

2008;9:1-. 
10. Hansen PW, Holroyd SE. Development and application of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy for 

detection of milk adulteration in practice. Int J Dairy Technol. 2019;72(3):321-31. 
11. Ni LJ, Zhang LG, Tang MY, Xue ZB, Zhang X, Gu X, Huang S. Discrimination of adulteration cow milk by 

improved υ-support vector machines (υ-SVM) and near infrared spectroscopy. In 2012 8th International 
Conference on Natural Computation; 2012 May 29, Chongqing, China; 2012. p. 69-73. 

12. Neto HA, Tavares WL, Ribeiro DC, Alves RC, Fonseca LM, Campos SV. On the utilization of deep and 
ensemble learning to detect milk adulteration. BioData Min. 2019;12(1):13. 

13. Mabood F, Hussain J, Al Nabhani MM, Gilani SA. Detection and quantification of formalin adulteration in 
cow milk using near infrared spectroscopy combined with multivariate analysis. J Adv Dairy Res. 
2017;5(2). 

14. Rebechi SR, Vélez MA, Vaira S, Perotti MC. Adulteration of Argentinean milk fats with animal fats: Detection 
by fatty acids analysis and multivariate regression techniques. Food Chem. 2016;192:1025-32. 

15. da Rocha RA, Paiva IM, Anjos V, Furtado MA, Bell MJ. Quantification of whey in fluid milk using confocal 
Raman microscopy and artificial neural network. J dairy sci. 2015;98(6):3559-67. 

16. Jiang L, Pan L, Gao H, Zheng H. Rapid identification and quantification of adulteration in Dendrobium 
officinale using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy combined with least-squares support vector 
machine. J Food Meas Charact. 2020;14(3):1427-32. 

17. Hsieh CL, Hung CY, Kuo CY. Quantization of adulteration ratio of raw cow milk by least squares support 
vector machines (LS-SVM) and visible/near infrared spectroscopy. In International Conference on 
Engineering Applications of Neural Networks; 2011 Sep 15, Berlin; 2011. p. 130-139. 

18. Kuswandi B, Putri FK, Gani AA, Ahmad M. Application of class-modelling techniques to infrared spectra 
for analysis of pork adulteration in beef jerkys. J Food Sci Technol. 2015;52(12):7655-68. 

19. Leonardi G., Portinale L. (2017) Applying Machine Learning to High-Quality milk Identification. In: 
Esposito F., Basili R., Ferilli S., Lisi F. (eds) AI*IA 2017 Advances in Artificial Intelligence. AI*IA 2017. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 10640. Springer, Cham 

20. Wu L, Liu Z, Bera T, Ding H, Langley DA, Jenkins-Barnes A, Furlanello C, Maggio V, Tong W, Xu J. A deep 
learning model to recognize food contaminating beetle species based on elytra fragments. Comput 
Electron Agric. 2019;166:105002. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):7 85 
 

21. Al-Sarayreh M, Reis MM, Yan WQ, Klette R. Deep spectral-spatial features of snapshot hyperspectral 
images for red-meat classification. In 2018 international conference on image and vision computing New 
Zealand (IVCNZ); 2018 Nov 19, Auckland, New Zealand; 2018. p. 1-6. 

22. Jayanthy S, Ayswaria SV, Vaishali M, Poorani PU. A high quality embedded system for assessing food 
quality using histogram of oriented gradients. ICTACT J Soft Comput. 2018;9(1). 

23. Rashvand M, Akbarnia A. The feasibility of using image processing and artificial neural network for 
detecting the adulteration of sesame oil. AIMS Agric Food. 2019;4(2):237-324. 

24. Jawaid S, Talpur FN, Sherazi ST, Nizamani SM, Khaskheli AA. Rapid detection of melamine adulteration in 
dairy milk by SB-ATR–Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Food chem. 2013;141(3):3066-71.