ARTICLE 

Collaborative Mobility-Aware Resource Allocation Framework Using 
Evolutionary Lion Optimization for Next-Generation Mobile Networks 

V. Bakyalakshmi1, K. Brindha2 and Swamynathan Ramakrishnan3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, Dr. N. G. P Arts and Science College, India. 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Data Science, Sri Krishna Adithya College of Arts & Science, India. 
3Amity Business School, Amity University, Dubai. 
*Corresponding Author: V. Bakyalakshmi. Email: vbakyalakshmi@yahoo.co.in  

Received: 26 July 2025; Accepted: 21 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: In terms of computer networking, Software-Defined Networking (SDN) provides a fast, 
convenient, maneuverable, and cost-effective method for controlling network flow with a minimum investment 
to reduce costs and increase benefits for massive mobile users. Future cellular networks face new challenges 
given the explosive growth of mobile data traffic and the limited availability of spectrum resources. Particularly, 
resource management in terms of load sensing and handover decisions in heterogeneous networks has become 
critical. Recently, the Group Mobility Model (GMM) named MoMo was introduced to solve the handover 
decision issue. The technology which distributes traffic among neighbouring Access Points (APs) to reduce 
congestion over an area is called Resource management and through which the optimal use of resources can 
be achieved by ensuring that wireless traffic has a proportionate share. To provide seamless and ubiquitous 
wireless connectivity to mobile users, efficient mobility management is necessary to ensure Quality of Service 
(QoS). In this study, an SDN-based Group Mobility Model (GMM) and resource management algorithm by 
Mutation Lion Optimization Algorithm (MLOA) is proposed to alleviate handover and address issues arising 
out of congestion in the network. The proposed method researches on the SDN controller in a global 
perspective of the given network for achieving network conditions and the end user QoS requirements into 
consideration. The proposed method shall be used dynamically for managing the flow of traffic and to support 
a large number of mobile users in a given SDN with optimum resource utilization. SDN-GMM provides 
transparent and efficient mobility support for ongoing sessions in each handoff scenario, thus eliminating 
congestion overhead and packet loss related to mobile traffic, and as a result, improving QoS for mobile users. 
The performance analysis through experiments depicts that the proposed model gives enhanced performance 
when compared to that of the other conventional methods and also has proven efficiency in terms of other 
parameters such as latency, cost of signaling, throughput and packet losses. The results from the simulation 
show that the proposed method, GMM-MLOA, greatly improves the performance of handovers and maintains 
optimum resource utilization and efficiency. 

KEYWORDS: Group Mobility Management (GMM), Software Defined Network (SDN), Quality of Service (QoS), 
Future Mobile Networks, Mutation Lion Optimization Algorithm (MLOA), MoMo model, handover. 
 

1 Introduction 
The rapidly growing mobile traffic in recent years is expected to reach 77.5 EB per month by 

2022 and account for 71% of total internet traffic. The growth in mobile traffic is accelerating owing 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



87 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

to the advent of smartphones and the expansion of video services. Most of the network service 
providers face more issues, such as heavy traffic and optimum resource allocation for complicated 
services, which require more connectivity requirements and thus the need for maintaining a 
seamless service amid diverse technologies and changing business requirements has become a 
mandate [1-2]. The network operators are hence in need of an innovative solution for performance 
improvement and efficiency, and also to minimize the operational cost and maintenance. In this 
connection, 3GPP, the third-generation partnership project, have proposed a flat optimization 
method such as the local IP and selective IP for traffic offload and IP flow mobility (IFOM) [3]. In order 
to combat the limitations of current centralized mobility management systems, the IETF created the 
Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) Working Group, which specifies an IP mobility 
management architecture separating the data plane from the control plane [4-5]. Design and 
development of flat architectures are being designed for improving the data plane, but still the cost 
was not under control, and also the complexity of controlling the plane was increasing in orders [6]. 
SDN combined with Network Functions Virtualizations (NFV) helps in decoupling the data and planes 
to offer an altogether new architecture of network, which is tailor-made for improvement in 
managing the control plane at both the backhaul as well as core network level [7]. In this way, the 
network operator shall reduce the overall operational cost and maintenance for the deployment of 
the service.  

Particularly, the separation of the data transfer and control parts of a network device through 
SDN can be successfully integrated with DMM technology in accordance with the method of 
distributing mobility functions in DMM. DMM schemes to enhance network structure by dispersing 
mobility functions have been researched. The DMM scheme can prevent the problem of excessive 
traffic concentration on some specific devices (e.g., Home Agent (HA) and Local Mobility Agent 
(LMA)) and improve the reliability of the network by solving the problem of service interruptions in 
the case of device failure. Additionally, by moving the mobile anchor closer to the user, the packet 
delivery path can be optimized, and effective interworking can be ensured with a content delivery 
network. However, the disadvantage of the DMM scheme is largely overcome by reducing the burden 
of signaling processing by designating a specific router as a centralized mobile anchor for some 
sessions.  

Group Mobility Model (GMM) is a mobility pattern described to predict the movement of the 
mobile node in terms of continuous changeover time, such as velocity, location, and acceleration [8]. 
In this model, each of the mobile nodes moves randomly together within the group using the Random 
Waypoint approach [9] and Reference Point Group Mobility Pattern (RPGP) [10]. Both group mobility 
and individual mobility are used DynnaMo approach, which provides a memory-related model. The 
MoMo model combines a memory-based individual model and a flexible group model, which 
increases the accuracy of the mobility model [11]. In order to combat the limitations of current 
centralized mobility management systems, the IETF created the Distributed Mobility Management 
(DMM) Working Group, which specifies an IP mobility management architecture separating the data 
plane from the control plane. Due to the fact that existing protocols were designed at present levels 
of network density, they will become a bottleneck in dense small cell deployments, as well as being 
used more frequently to communicate mobile management messages. OF-SDNs are yet another 
candidate solution which largely supports DMM features and exceeds the performance of 
conventional solutions. There are numerous advantages of OpenFlow, which make it more familiar 
in the use of SDN-based solutions. This includes reaching out to the plane, which is being forwarded, 
that switches between the network and services. In this research paper, SDN SDN-based MoMo model 
is proposed for future mobile networks to reduce the handover latency, signaling cost, and packet 
drop ratio. OpenFlow-Based Group Mobility Model (GMM) with an integrated DS for mobile services 
in SDNs. The contribution of the proposed SDN-based GMM work comprises of following steps: The 
proposed model, the Mobility Management Module (MME) and the Admission Control module are 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 88 
 

incorporated into the SDN architecture. The Mutation Lion Optimization Algorithm (MLOA) is 
proposed to alleviate handover and solve the congestion issues. The proposed method addresses the 
SDN controller view in a global perspective and the end user QoS requirements addicted to 
consideration. In the handover phase, the grouping of each node is checked periodically based on two 
conditions, namely, the Free State and Forced State processes. Finally, the performances such as 
latency, throughput, cost of signaling and losses are then assessed for the proposed work, which 
shows an improved efficiency than the existing GMM technique. 

2 Literature Review 
Duan et al [12] introduced SDN-enabled resource optimization techniques applied in futuristic 

cellular networks. In the proposed method, three objectives were considered, namely the shortage of 
spectrum through effective offloading of traffic, addressing of congestion in the network through 
optimal load balancing across different cells and to achieve these while maintaining the expected 
QoS. In this method, SDN enables partial offloading of data, and load balance techniques are 
proposed. The technique identifies the opportunities in a global perspective for achieving optimum 
resource allocation. The proposed method is analyzed for its performance in a simulated 
environment. A framework is also proposed for the quantification of delays which are incurred by 
virtue of SDN-enabled processing of data. Simulation results have shown that the proposed method 
of load balancing considerably increases the extent of equilibrium and the stability of the network 
when compared to that of baseline methods. The proposed method also shows a satisfactory result 
in QoS while also achieving significant savings in the usage of cellular resources.  

Yang and Kim [13] applied the SDN concept to the Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) 
architecture to support efficient mobility management and to solve existing problems in centralized 
mobility schemes. In our proposed scheme, we define a new mobility management entity for reducing 
tunnelling overhead, supporting route optimization. To evaluate the proposed management scheme, 
establish an analytical model and formulate signaling and packet-delivery costs. Nguyen et al [14] 
proposed a DMM-enabled solution, which is based on the architecture of SDN, named S-DMM. The 
proposed technique gives more advantages that including a deployment-free mobility component 
which accesses the router and is independent of the underlying methods and flow-based mobile 
support. The experimental results have proven that the S-DMM architecture is more stable and also 
scalable when compared to conventional DMM. The results have also proven that the proposed S-
DMM has zero penalty on performance (in terms of latency and delay) when compared to that of the 
conventional DMM, yet the cost is a bit higher in management, which makes the proposed technique 
best suitable for the upcoming 5G network.  

Ko et al [15] introduced an SDN-based technique for DMM, which is different from the normal 
network and terminal-based techniques. The proposed SDN-DMM is implemented on the location 
and handover management in the centralized controller when the packet forwarding functions are 
completely distributed in routers. This makes the SDN-DMM achieve packet forwarding 
optimizations and also provides constant benefits, such as networks and to manage traffic effectively. 

 Jeon et al [16] presented the Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) as a core idea for 
tackling the hindrances which can impact present networks by presenting the deployment of various 
points of anchors which are much closer to the terminus. There were various proposals for building 
DMM-based solutions that focus on the merits of futuristic networks that aim to overcome limitations 
in the present centralized MMS. A detailed analysis of the experimental results is carried out, and the 
essential design constraints and options are also identified through the impact analysis on 
performance. To add this, the recent advancements in DMM with the emerging techniques, such as 
control and separation of the data plane, are also left for future study, which can impact the network 
paradigm for the forthcoming generation.  



89 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

Khan et al [17] analyzed the effect of various system variables on overall handover delays in 
SDNized wireless networks and designed diverse mobility management approaches. The authors 
have also studied various enhancements in handling delays caused during handovers in a couple of 
aspects. (i) when the proactive MMA algorithm is implemented, and (ii) when the delegation of 
partial control of MMA is implemented on the controller. To implement the proposed techniques in 
an OF network, the authors also suggest different potential extensions for the OpenFlow-based 
protocol. The experiments are performed in a large-scale demonstrator that exhibits proactive 
results which are better than the reactive measures for the topologies that are smaller in size. 
Further, the authors have suggested a Long-term Evolution (LTE) that has specific delegation control 
as a case study.  

In Park et al [18], SDN have been proposed to provide mobility management based on OpenFlow 
(OMM) and a data structure for mobility services. Mobility Management Entities (MMEs) are 
incorporated into one scheme to manage mobility functions and to organize a new data structure 
based on Local Mobility Anchors (LMAs) and Mobile Access Gateways (MAGs). MAG and LMA entries 
that have duplicate content are eliminated, and the entries that have duplicate content are integrated.  

Cominardi et al [19] introduced the proxy-based Mobile IPV6 solution using the DMM, where it 
serves as a definite baseline which explores DMM standards in SDN, which also include the detection 
of DMM, its principles and challenges. Based on the investigation, the SDN-enabled DMM is evaluated 
with the standard methods in both analytical and experimental views.  

A Bursty Multi-node Handover scheme (BMH–DMM) architecture was used in Huang et al. [20] 
to deal with this problem of mobile internet in part by utilizing partially distributed mobility 
management. For a group that has n MNs, the proposed BMH-DMM method eliminates n sets of 
control messages for handover from a group of them with one set of control messages. The analysis 
shows that the amount of handover overhead does not increase so much when the number of MNs 
switch over at the same time and place, which means the proposed BMH-DMM method can reduce 
the bandwidth consumption for exchanging handover signaling messages by about 30%. 
Additionally, using the proposed BMH-DMM scheme is less likely to cause network utilization, 
handover delay, packet loss, and blocking during the handover process than using the individual 
handover model. 

Bi et al [21] introduced an SDN modelled Mobility Manager scheme to provide support for the 
seamless domain handovers along with optimized routes. By decoupling SDN mobility management 
from packet forwarding, SDN-MM provides route optimization and mobility control logic in an SDN 
controller while excluding traffic redirection from it. An extensive set of signaling operations is 
created by means of SDN-MM in order to provide transparent and efficient mobility support for 
ongoing sessions in a handover scenario, which mitigates packet loss and unnecessary tunnelling 
overhead, and accordingly improves QoS for mobile users. In SDN-MM, an SDN controller calculates 
the most efficient end-to-end route in advance of handover and decides whether to migrate traffic to 
the route based on the performance gain and the signaling overhead, which greatly increases 
bandwidth utilization. The simulation results show that the proposed SDN-MM enhances handover 
performance and ensures high resource utilization efficiency at the same time. 

In order to evaluate the accuracy of this Make-Before-Break (MBB) method, Jaumard et al [22] 
developed a near-optimal two-phase defragmentation process to assess its accuracy. To calculate the 
best rerouting, e.g., with the least bandwidth requirements, first construct an exact optimization 
model for the decomposition scheme. Second, demonstrate the best MBB reroute option if possible, 
with the resultant re-routing; otherwise, demonstrate no option. Numerous experiments in many 
datasets are performed in small and medium-sized datasets to compare the proposed method with 
that of the two-phased models. Finally, the focus was made on the real-time scalability of the 
proposed method in large and real-time data. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 90 
 

 

3 Proposed System 
In this study, an SDN-based Group Mobility Model (GMM) and a resource management algorithm 

by Mutation Lion Optimization Algorithm (MLOA) are proposed to alleviate handover and to address 
the network congestion issues. Group-based Mobility Management (GMM) method, named MoMo, is 
proposed by utilizing Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) is introduced to SDN environment. 
By using an SDN controller's global view of the network, the proposed algorithm takes network 
conditions and end-user QoS requirements into account to achieve network quality. An SDN 
controller's global view of the network and the optimization of resource allocation decisions are 
handled by MLOA. The proposed system has four phases of operation, namely the Initial Phase, 
Handover (HO) Preparation phase, Resource management phase, and HO Phase. 

3.1 Network Model 

 
Figure 1: SDN-based wireless heterogeneous network structure with control plane design 

Consider Figure 1, where the environment of a network with cellular BSs and Wi-Fi access points 
(APs) is shown. A licensed communication is used by BSs, while an unlicensed communication is used 
by Access points, which are present in a random manner inside each cell. OpenFlow-based protocol 
is followed in BSs, APs and switches for enabling ease of control to the SDN controller using a secured 
channel. Assumption is made in such a way that every BS and the access points are strongly 
connected with the OpenFlow switches as presented in Figure 1. For a given cellular network, these 
switches are then co-located with the Base stations. Different from macro cell switches, the femtocell 
directly connects to the internet, whereas macro cells are then a part of core networks. On the other 



91 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

side, as far as the access points are considered, these switches will be found located inside the ISP 
and every switch is then connected to many access points. All the switches will then be found 
controlled in a centralized manner using SDN, and given the incidence that the proposed controller 
is just a program which runs on the server, the same can be fixed anywhere inside the network, even 
in a distant data center [23]. 

In Figure 1, the OpenFlow switch is similar to an access point, except that its original control 
functions have been transferred to the controller, leaving it with only data forwarding functionality, 
which makes it equivalent to a pure data channel. Controlling devices, managing OpenFlow switches 
and APs, and delivering flow tables is the function of the controller, which is a centralized and unified 
logic control unit. Furthermore, in this architecture, the SDN controller is a fundamental component, 
and as a fundamental component of the architecture, the SDN framework must be outlined and 
discussed in depth. The controller application consists of two core modules, namely, Offload Manager 
(OM) and Resource Management (RM). As part of the OM module, the service-level rules describe the 
traffic features and characteristics that are necessary for the offload manager, such as the 
corresponding IP address, port number, bit rate, and delay sensitivity, based on the TFT [22] and the 
corresponding QoS descriptions. Additionally, the RM module features load measurement and mobile 
management features, which execute algorithms to measure and balance cell load. The overall 
framework of the proposed method is presented in Figure 2, where it is observed that SDN 
applications can make use of the global view of access points to improve the management of a 
network. 

 
Figure 2: SDN-based offloading scenario and module framework 

The focus of this section is to present SDN-based resource management algorithms for the 
heterogeneous network shown in Figure 2. The aim is to solve spectrum shortage problems and 
network congestion in cellular networks by enabling mobile data offloading and Resource 
Management within the SDN. An SDN-based model in which partial offloading of data carried out is 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 92 
 

depicted in the model. As the process indicates, here, only a part of the data is transferred to the Wi-
Fi and the rest of the traffic is then transferred across various cellular networks. For further 
elaboration, the network will be unable to satisfy the requirement due to delay and loss-sensitive 
flow, as only part of the data is offloaded. It is shown in the latter part of this paper how the proposed 
method can help in improving the performance by considering various requirements. The access 
points in a network are then stripped of the management of control functions, and each of the access 
points can be connected with different mobile terminals. There exists a module for managing a larger 
volume of access points with the terminals in the network, and hence, a module for management is 
deployed in the controller for managing the terminals. The proposed model is segregated into 
sublevels: The access point management and the terminal management. The access point 
management helps in discovering and configuring the APs, and in managing and collecting the 
information in each of the access points. 

3.2 Offloading Management 
The proposed algorithm proceeds as follows: The data is queued in the OpenFlow switch and 

waits for further processing; OM selects traffic flows based on delay thresholds when a mobile user 
moves within the Wi-Fi coverage, where optimum traffic selection is made for offloading. Given the 
fact that these Wi-Fi networks give high rates in the absence of QoS, which guarantees the unlicensed 
bands, the privilege to offload traffic shall be made discrete. The aim is to minimize the usage of 
cellular leverage using Wi-Fi connection as available while performing the same in the absence of any 
performance degradation. The algorithm used for the appropriate flow is presented below.  

Step 1: The OM collects the requirements of traffic flow from all users inside the Wi-Fi area, and 
the resources required are calculated. It is assumed that every user has a certain demand for traffic 
represented by ui and a rate of link lrw

i  for the access points. Each user of the Wi-Fi has a resource 
demand, calculated as w

θi =  u w
i/ri . The resources of Wi-Fi that are available for the offloading shall 

be estimated based on the same.  
Step 2: If Wi-Fi cannot transfer all the data before the deadline, partial offloading is performed. 

The OM calculates the amount of data that can be transferred over the Wi-Fi network within the delay 
tolerance threshold, and in other words, all the data will be offloaded to the Wi-Fi network. The delay 
in tolerance of the threshold is calculated (Ths) and the volume of data represented by Vs which 
are transferred in a given time frame Ths. With the effect of parallel transmission, the bursts are 
subjected to arrive at the receiver's end in a similar time and thus which minimises the period of wait 
that is required for every packet to reach the receiver’s device. Hence, the overall time delay for the 
arrival of the packet is minimized using the offloading method.  

Step 3: The Om then updates the records of the Wi-Fi sources available after the process of 
offloading and QoS, which can be provided during the PDO and these records are kept for a while, 
and it helps in quick decision making where a new flow of traffic arrives. The direction of the mobility 
of a particular user is estimated by OM and assuming that a user enters and then leaves an offloading 
region at two different times, namely tiin and tiout and as a consequence, the time of connection 
would be tic  =  tiout −  tiin. Here, the tolerance of the delay threshold Ths will be equal to that of the 
difference among the applications in a specific deadline, represented as Thd, which are then obtained 
through TFT filters of the network model and hence the waiting time in the SDN process is 
represented as D, which is explained in the following section. Let the amount of data transmitted be 
represented as 𝑉𝑠. Let 𝑏𝑤1, 𝑏𝑤2 represent the bandwidths that are allotted by the cellular network 
and the Wi-Fi network, respectively. As represented in [24], the smallest value among the 𝑡𝑖𝑟  and 
Ths shall be used for the calculation of the present volume of data. Hence, 𝑉𝑠 is denoted as, 

Vs = bw1Ths + bw2 min(tir, Ths)    (1) 



93 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

3.3 Resource management 
It consists of two modules: the resource sensing and the handover decision module, deployed at the 

application layer. The management module installed in the controller is responsible for obtaining most of 
the state information about each of the access points, and the load sensing module is mainly responsible 
for obtaining the state information about the network. As a consequence of the AP weight algorithm 
proposed in this paper, each AP is assigned a weight, and each terminal is switched according to the 
weights. This balances network resource management by scheduling traffic and switching terminals 
appropriately. An improved seamless handover technique and a method for resource management 
handover are proposed, which can improve QoS and resource utilization of networks. 

3.4 Seamless handover 
The terminal handover delay and the network delay both occur in four steps: queuing, node 

processing, transmission, and propagation, with delays in the first three steps being on the order of a few 
microseconds and hence the proposed technique mainly concentrates on the delays due to handover and 
propagation. The traditional handover method usually takes hundreds of milliseconds [25]. The handover 
phase comprises two modules, such as the MMM and the admission controlling module and the dummy 
and tiny cells are administered in the data planes for managing mobility. Furthermore, the Mobility 
Management Entity (MME) is made to handle the HO procedure. In this way, the required mobility-related 
data, for instance, the MN subscription data, mobile identification, and tackling trail area posts are 
attained. The mobile node ID (MN_ID) and Evolving Node ID (EN_ID) parameters are employed for MNs 
and small cells [25].In the proposed SDN–GMM, MoMo model, the number of evolving nodes in the 
network contains a hexagonal architecture. This utilizes the Automatic Neighbour Relation (ANR) 
function of evolving node count by which the neighbour relation tables are updated. Accordingly, the 
proposed SDN-GMM MoMo model reaches the valid neighbour relations of the evolving new nodes from 
these tables. In future mobile networks, the random-access channel (RACH) is utilized by MN to start the 
session with an arbitrary access preamble throughout the primary movement of the connection process. 
In addition, this preamble comprises the MN_ID. Next, the goal evolving node manages the OF table to 
discover the arriving MN_ID. If this MN_ID is integrated into the table, an HO response is given to the MN. 
This response specifies that the HO appeal is established by the evolving node. Then the connect process 
continues amid the MN and evolving nodes with the equivalent message series as Downlink Shared 
Channel (DL-SCH), uplink shared channel (UL-SCH).  

We investigate delays observed in the HO training stage, and if no MN_ID was found, we transfer the 
request to the controller, where a revision of the set of OF tables is made, and we proceed to the HO phase, 
which describes how the nodes of the SD, where an intelligent and futuristic network lies. 

3.5 Distance among nodes 
The proposed SDN-GMM-based MoMo model defines the binding conditions related to physical 

proximity between the nodes. The binding condition between two nodes, namely i and j are in the same 
group, are referred to as group mates, and is defined as in equation (2), 

dij ≤ Dc    (2) 

Where, dij = dji is the distance between nodes i and j. If the binding condition in equation (2) is 
satisfied, the two nodes are said to be distance Dc connected. Consider a group of size M. For the generic 
node jth set of Mc

j  group mates that the node detects as connected are called its connected set. The ratio 
between Mc

j  and the total number M of group mates is called the grouping factor ρj in equation (3), 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 94 
 

Mc

ρj = j
    (3) 

M−1

The behaviour of node j depends on the Grouping Condition (GC) defined on ρj in equation (4), 

ρj ≥ ρmin    (4) 

where the grouping threshold ρmin is a tunable model parameter. Every node occasionally verifies 
whether the GC is satisfied, with period ∇u based on the result, the node transitions into one of the two 
subsequent states, like free and forced: Free State occurs when the GC is satisfied. Here, the node freely 
moves based on the boundless mobility model; a forced state occurs when the GC is not satisfied. Here, 
the node travels towards the closest group mate, k, is not part of its connected set, to improve its grouping 
factor. The speed variables v and θ are set as in equations (5) and (6), 

v = vmax    (5) 

 

min(βkj, θold + γminTlu), ifβkj ≥ θold
θ = {     (6) 

max(βkj, θold − γmaxTlu), otherwise

y −y
Where, βkj = arctan ( k j) , (x , y  n  x , j  r  

k−x k k) a d ( j y ) a e the locations of nodes k and j, 
x j

respectively, θold  is the previous direction, and Tluis the time elapsed until the final position update. 
Equation (5) and Equation (6) ensure that the node j  attains the chosen group mate k in the shortest 
probable time frame, while evading although destruction of the limitation on linear and angular speed. 
The MN is still associated with the previous Access Points (AP) that detect the next AP. It established a 
signal strength which is advanced than the predefined value of threshold and which is the uppermost on 
all of the APs that are in range. The MNS throws back reports are messages where the next information 
of the access point is conveyed to that of the first one. 

 

Figure 3: Example of the function of the SDN – GMM Momo mobility model for a group of 8 nodes 

Figure 3 a), the measured node (black node) is linked to three striped nodes in its collection, out of 
its 7 group mates, and the grouping factor ρ = 3/7 calculated by the node is less than the necessary ρmin. 
As a result, the node goes into forced mode and travels towards the nearby group mate among its 



95 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

connected set. The node preserves this behaviour until the GCis is satisfied, evolving towards the situation 
in 2. b), where the range of the connected set is increased to 4, corresponding to ρ ≥ ρmin. The behaviour 
defined in the forced mode, which is moving towards the closest group mate not in the connected set, is 
not the only possible one. More complex behaviours, e.g., moving towards the centroid of the points of 
group mates, can be easily established in the framework of the proposed SDN–GMM MoMo model. Figure 
3 demonstrates an instance of the application of the SDN–GMM MoMo model in the case of a group of 8 
nodes with ρmin= 0.5. Lines between nodes indicate connectivity for the SDN–GMM MoMo mobility 
model. In Figure 3a), the size 3 of the connected set for the black node leads to a grouping factor ρ = 0.43. 
The GC is thus not satisfied, and the node moves to the closest group mate not part of its connected set, 
until the condition is satisfied, as in the configuration shown in Figure 3b, in which Mc= 4, ρ = 0.57). 
The definition of connectivity and the corresponding meaning of the threshold Dc is a key feature in 
SDN –GMM MoMo. The replication for a flexible definition of the theory of association, rooted in the 
application scenario: 

 Connectivity related to radio communications - here, two nodes are associated either during a 
straight radio connection (physical layer associativity), while they are in the radio range, or during 
conveying, assured by additional group mates (network associativity); 

 Connectivity is rooted in a radio-independent constraint - for instance, if a collection will become a 
security team, material visibility may correspond to association: a team member will go freely until it is 
capable of viewing a minimum count of team members, and travels nearer to the extra members of the 
team when the circumstance is not met any longer. 

3.6 Propagation delay 
In the future, the flow table in the AP will still be updated when the terminal performs the handover, 

but the terminal associated with the AP has changed. Through the management modules, all the 
underlying APs and all the mobile terminal's state information are collected, including the parameters 
affecting AP performance, and are passed to the load balancing module. The load balancing module 
determines the merits of each AP's comprehensive performance by calculating its weight value according 
to the state information collected by the algorithm, before deciding whether to hand over to that AP which 
performs better. By using this handover method, you can balance the load on the network and improve 
its efficiency. Assume that the signal strength S, then S is an average of the signal strength S by equation 
(7). 

S = αS̅t + (1 − α)S̅t−1    (7) 

Where α is a smoothing factor. In this work, the AP historical traffic of the latest n unit time ti0 of 
the AP is counted. The unit flow of the AP in the ith ti0 time by equation (8), 

T R
F x x

T(i) i +F
= i     (8) 

ti0

where T
F x

i  represent that the traffic which is sent by the access points in the ith unit under a specific 
time ti0 of a queue where R

F x
i  represent traffic that is received in the access points of the ith unit in a 

time ti0 of the queue. The throughput T̃ of the access point is presented in Eq. (9), 

∑n

T̃ i=1 T(i)
=     (9) 

n

Based on the known number of APs and the historical performance of the AP, propose a resource 
index based on the throughput and total number of AP terminals. The index of the resource is represented 
as APk on a given network is Rk which is again computed using Eq (10), 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 96 
 

T̃
R k N

k = + k     (10) 
Tmax Nmax

where T̃k  denote the old throughput in APk  for a given period of time. Tmax  represent the 
maximum amount of throughput which the APk shall withstand. Nk denote the total terminals which 
are associated with the APk . Tmax  and Nmax  are obtained through intense testing. Hence, it can be 
concluded that these performance weights for an AP are then calculated through the Eq (11), 

S
w = k    (11) 

Lk

To sum up is calculated by equation (12), 

αS̅
w t+(1−α)S̅

= t−1   
T̃k N

+ k  (12) 
Tmax Nmax

In the resource balancing handover method, the controller monitors the AP through its global 
perspective and allocates appropriate weights for each AP based on the collected AP state information. In 
order to serve an STA, the controller picks the AP with the best performance according to the weight size 
of the AP associated with a strong signal, a relatively small number of STAs, and a low historical 
throughput. 

 
3.6.1 Parameters affecting AP performance 

As a general rule, the signal strength S of APs and the number of connected terminals N affect their 
performance, and the stronger the received signal strength, the better the wireless link's transmission 
quality. Handover based on signal strength has been traditional. The number of terminals associated with 
each AP can provide some indication of the AP load, and in general, terminals associated with the same 
content are selected. The potential of every terminal to contest for a channel is constant. If there is a large 
number of access points associated with a given terminal and if the competition is mode, the impact will 
also be great in the resultant collision in performance. 
3.7 Mutation Lion Optimisation Algorithm (MLOA) 

This is a population-based method of developing a weighted solution in SDN [26,27] wherein 
the first step is to create a random population over the solution space, referred to as a ''Lion'' weight 
value. In given 𝑵𝒗𝒂𝒓 dimension optimisation problems, a Lion is denoted as 𝑳𝒊𝒐𝒏 = [𝒙𝟏, … 𝒙𝑵 ]. 

𝒗𝒂𝒓

N-pop solutions are generated randomly in the search space for delay comparison and throughput 
estimation of SDN networks. The percentile of N generated values of weight and traffic values are 
selected in nomad lion representation based on equations (13 and 8) as factors to decide delay. The 
remaining population are randomly segregated into P no of prides. Each of the solutions present in 
this technique has a specific gender and remains constant throughout the optimisation, and to 
eliminate the fact, in every pride, a percentage of S in the overall population is obtained in the last 
step, which are known as females, and the rest are treated as males. In the process of searching, the 
lion makes its best visit position. 
3.7.1 Hunting 

A few females hunt for prey (weight calculations, delay calculations, and throughput calculations) 
and in a group in order to provide food to their pride, and these females do not use the same strategies to 
catch the prey in every pride. A dummy sort of prey denoted as PREY is then considered at the centre and 
represented as hunters (𝑷𝑹𝑬𝒀 =  ∑  𝒉𝒖𝒏𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒔( 𝒙𝟏, … 𝒙𝑵 )). During the process of hunting, the 

𝒗𝒂𝒓

hunters are often selected sequentially for the calculation of delay and for computing throughput in SDNs, 
and each of the hunters who are selected on a dummy prey for which the procedure is defined at a later 



97 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

part, as per the group which has selected the lion (where the weight of the access points and SDN) belongs. 
During the whole process of hunting, in case a particular hunter moves its fineness through eq (12), the 
PREY shall escape from the hunter, the fresh PREY is obtained through equation (13), 

PREY′ = PREY + rand(0,1) × PerI × (PREY − Hunter)    (13) 

Where the PREY is in the present position of the prey for the calculation of the weight of an access 
point with any weight by altering the path to the nearest access point. The hunter will be in a new position, 
who can now attack the prey, and the PI denote the percentile of the improvement in the level of fitness 
of the hunter through the reduction in traffic and which increases the throughput of the access points. 
The changed positions of the hunters belonging to both left as well as right wings are then generated as 
in Eq. (14). 

rand((2 × PREY − Hunter), PREY), (2 × PREY − Hunter) < 𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑌
Hunter′ = {     (14) 

rand(PREY(2 × PREY − Hunter)), (2 × PREY − Hunter) > 𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑌

Here, PREY represent the present position of the selection of an alternate access point along with the 
values of weight in SDN. Hunter denotes the present position, and the new position is represented as 
Hunter'. The central hunter is generated using the Eq (15), 

rand(Hunter, PREY), Hunter < 𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑌
Hunter′ = {     (15) 

rand(PREY, Hunter),          Hunter > 𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑌

In both of the above equations, the function 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑(𝑎, 𝑏) is used to generate a number between the 
interval [a, b], where a and b denote the upper and subsequent lower bounds. In the present work, we are 
introducing the mutation operator for the generation of a and b. The mutation value adds new a ' and b’ 
values via the upper and lower bounds based on the throughput speed of the terminals in the AP. It may 
increase the weight value of the AP and reduce the traffic congestion of the AP in the network. 
3.7.2 Moving Toward a Safe Place 

As discussed in the previous section, in every pride, a few females go hunting. The females which 
remain go towards one of the territories. As the territory related to every pride has a personal best (AP) 
of each of the members, which assists in Mutation Lion Optimization (MLO) for saving the better solutions 
obtained till time in due course of iteration and can be used as valuable and reliable input for solutions to 
improve in MLOA. Hence, the new position of a female shall be obtained through the Eq (16). 

Female Lion′ = Female Lion + 2D × rand(0,1){R1} + U(−1,1) × tan(θ) × D × {R2}  (16) 
{R1}. {R2} = 0, ||{R2}|| = 1  

In the above equation, Female Lion indicates the present position of the female lion, and D denotes 
the distance in-between the position and a selected point, which is chosen by the tournament and 
computed using equation (2). {R1} denote a vector that starts in a prior location of a female lion, i.e the 
access points (AP), and it is directed towards the given AP’s position. It is seen that {R2} will be 
perpendicular to that of {R1}. Initially, the success of a lion is defined if it improves its own personal best 
in the last iteration of MLOA. Given a group P, the success of a lion ‘i’ (AP) at a given iteration ‘t’ is then 
defined as in Eq(17). 

1 Bestt t−1
i,p < Besti,p

S(i, t, P) = {
0 Bestt      (17) 

,p = Bestt−1
i i,p

where Bestt
i,p indicate the best position of AP identified by a lion ‘i’ in an iteration ‘t’. A large number 

of successes ensure that these lions have converged on an access point that has minimized traffic, which 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 98 
 

is far away from the point of optimization. By using the success values of Kj(s)shall be computed using 
Eq(18). 

Kj(s) = ∑n
i=1 S(i, t, P) j = 1, … P     (18) 

In the above equation, n denotes the total count of lions in a given pride (AP), Kj(s) denote the total 
count of lions in a given pride j that has an improvement in the fitness from the previous iterations. This 
enables the size of the tournament to be adaptive for every iteration. It indicates that as the success rate 
decreases, the size of the tournament will increase, which can lead to diversity. Hence, the size of the 
tournament shall be calculated using Eq. (19). 

TSize Kj(s)
j = max (2, ceil ( )) , j = 1,2 … . P     (19) 

2

 
3.7.3 Moving Toward a Safe Place 

As part of the Mutation Lion Optimization Algorithm (MLOA), roaming is a strong local search and 
results in the Lion moving in the direction of the selected territory by x units, where x is a random number 
with uniform distribution. 

x~U(0, 2 × d)     (20) 

In this equation, d represents the distance between the male lion's location and the selection of 
territory, and angle ∗ represents the angle added to this direction to determine throughput history 
when searching for a wider area AP. In equation (21), we calculate the new AP position of nomad lions 
using the MLOA algorithm based on the nomad lions' adaptive roaming assist to avoid local optima. 

Lion   f r n >
Lion′ ij i  a dj pri

ij = {     (21) 
RANDj  else

Here, Lioni denote the present position of AP of the ith lion, j denotes the dimension, and RANDj 

denotes a uniform number allotted randomly in the range [0, 1], RAND indicate a randomly generated 
vector in every search space, and pri indicate the probabilities which are computed for every lion which 
is a nomad and are independently calculated using Eq(22). 

(Nomadi−Best
pri = 0.1 + min (0.5, nomad)

)  i = 1,2, … , number of nomad lions     (22) 
Bestnomad

Nomadi and Bestnomad depict the computational cost of the present position of the ith lion (AP) 
present in nomads, along with the corresponding best cost. 

 
3.7.4 Mating 

According to the equations below, following the selection of the female and male (s) for mating, the 
new cubs are created. Mating is an essential process, as it involves a linear combination between parents 
(APs). 

(1−β)
Offspringj1 = β × Female Lionj + ∑

∑NR × MaleLioni
j × Si    (23) 

i=1 Si

β
Offspringj2 = (1 − β) × Female Lionj + ∑

∑NR × MaleLioni
j × Si    (24) 

i=1 Si



99 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

This formula is as follows: j = dimension, 𝑆_𝑖 =  1, otherwise it equals 0, NR = number of males in 
the pride, β is a randomly generated number from a normal distribution with a mean value of 0.5 and a 
standard deviation of 0:1, where any one of the offspring is randomly selected as a male and the other as 
female. 
3.7.5 Migration 

For the migration operator, some females (AP with reduced traffic) were selected randomly and 
became nomads. When selected females (APs with reduced traffic) are migrated from a pride and become 
nomads, the new and old females are arranged according to the weight of the access points (APs). The 
best females are then selected from the group in a random way and are distributed to the prides to fill the 
empty place of a migrated female (AP with minimized traffic). This methodology helps to maintain the 
entire population and shares information between the prides. 

4 Results and Discussions 
In this section, the HO presentation is evaluated with the proposed GMM- MLOA model and 

estimates performance metrics including signaling cost, average HO latency, and packet loss rate. The 
simulation result of the proposed method is estimated by using the NS-3 network simulator version 
3.26. It is a discrete-event network simulator using the OpenFlow module. By using it, the HO process 
is verified. The simulation environment comprises four sorts of network essentials with 50 MUs, 10 
routers that manage 10 APs, 10 corresponding nodes, and 802.11n infrastructure. The simulation is 
continuously performed 30 times to discover the regular outcomes. In order to evaluate the proposed 
method of handover, the performance indicators that are more intuitive and which reflect the 
performance of the network, such as cost of signaling, Latency in handover, throughput, packet loss, 
rate of transmission and delay, are considered. 

4.1 Signalling cost 
It is defined as the HO update of mobility binding acquired during the processing of Hos. Therefore, 

the mobile management protocol will cost more when signaling messages are delivered via wired and 
wireless networks, depending on the number of hops, the dimension of the message, and the weighting 
scale, respectively. The proposed SDN-GMM, the global assessment makes provision for the SDN 
controller to gain agents' routers and for managing the signal messages in processing of MN’s HO. Both 
the MME and the MODULE are expected to hold the mobility administration and to handle MN’s 
registration to have GMM service. The signaling cost for the proposed SDN-GMM is represented as in 
Eq. (25). 

ℎ𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚ℎ𝑜𝑝𝑀𝑁−𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝜇 [ +𝜌𝐿ℎ𝑖ℎ𝑜𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟−𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟 ]    (25) 
+𝜌𝐿ℎ𝑎𝑐𝑘ℎ𝑜𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟−𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟

Where h and ρ are wired, and wireless link’s weight factor, µ is the arrival rate of each MN via 
router, Linform refers to the dimension of handover message, Lhi and Lhacks indicate the dimension of HI 
and Hack message respectively, hop specifies the connection between two nodes. Figures 4 and 5 
portray the difference in the signaling cost based on the diverse velocity of MNs and with varying hop 
counts. It is seen that the velocity of MN is increased from 5 to 30 m/s, and when the hop count is set 
between 1 and 10, the radius of the corresponding binding message of the proposed GMM-MLOA is 
smaller when compared to conventional approaches such as CMM [28], S-hDMM [29], GMM [30], and 
SDN-GMM. The proposed technique achieves 187, 243, 300, 357, 419, and 498 signaling costs per 
packet versus mn’s velocity from 5 to 30 m/s. Similarly, considering the signaling cost versus hop count 
and it shows that the proposed method attains 390 signaling cost per packet from 10 hop count, 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 100 
 

whereas other methods, such as CMM, S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM, have a higher signal cost of 807, 
784, 677, and 439, respectively, per packet from 10 hop count. 

900
800
700
600 CMM
500

S-hDMM
400
300 GMM

200 SDN-GMM
100

GMM-MLOA
0

5 10 15 20 25 30

Velocity of MN(m/seonds)

 
Figure 4: Handover signaling cost versus velocity of MNs 

900
800
700
600 CMM
500

S-hDMM
400
300 GMM
200 SDN-GMM
100

0 GMM-MLOA

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Number of hop count
 

Figure 5: Handover signaling cost versus the number of hops count 

1400

1200

1000
CMM

800
S-hDMM

600
GMM

400

200 SDN-GMM

0 GMM-MLOA

100 150 200 250 300 350

Radius of Cell(m)
 

Figure 6: Handover signaling cost versus radius of cells 

Signalling Cost(Packet) Signalling Cost(Packet) Signalling Cost(Packet)



101 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

The result of the radius of the cell is analyzed, and it is found that as the radius gets larger, the HO 
occurrence rate gets lowered occurrence rate. In this analysis result, the proposed GMM-MLOA model 
attains an improved output of 92 signaling cost efficiency for a 350 radius of cell in metres, whereas 
other methods such as CMM, S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM give higher signaling costs of 472, 315, 
284, and 185 for a 350 radius of cell, respectively. The comparison graph of handover signaling loss 
versus radius of cell using different techniques is revealed in Figure 6. 

4.2 Handover latency 
The HO latency is defined as the time it takes for MN to accept the first packet from its novel 

mobility router from the moment it begins the HO process. In order to move a packet over wired or 
wireless links, the delay time must be taken into account, including propagation time, transmission 
delay, and queueing time. A packet sent from u to v is modelled and which involves the hop count 
distance from the source to the destination. Assuming the wired links are steady and reliable, the packet 
delay time is represented by equation (26), where p is the packet size. 

𝑆𝑚𝑠𝑔
𝐷𝑡𝑚,𝑛 = ℎ𝑜𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ∗ ( + 𝐿 + 𝑊 )

𝐵𝑊 𝑝𝑙 𝑎𝑞     (26) 
𝑏𝑛𝑑

 
Where  Smsg , Lpl , hop count, BWbnd  and Waq  are the average message volume, latency of 

propagation,  
Hop distance and the bandwidth accessible, and the average delay in the queue in each router. 

From Figure 7, the proposed GMM-MLOA model achieves 75 ms of handover latency for an average 
queuing delay time of 50ms, whereas other methods, such as S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM, give 
higher latencies of 325ms, 275ms, 185ms, and 102ms for an average queuing delay time of 50ms, 
respectively. The proposal SDN-GMM method exhibits lower HO latency than the traditional handover 
technique, which increases the average queuing delay at each router. 

350

300

250
CMM

200
S-hDMM

150
GMM

100
SDN-GMM

50
GMM-MLOA

0
10 20 30 40 50

Average Queuing Delay(ms)

 
Figure 7: Handover delay versus average queuing delay 

4.3 Throughput 
Throughput (𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑡) is defined as the complete volume of data which is transmitted per session 

(𝑆𝑎𝑑 ∗ 𝐿𝑢) in the particular session’s delivery time, and the same is represented as in Eq(27). 

Handover Latency(ms)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 102 
 

𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 = 𝑆𝑎𝑑 ∗ 𝐿𝑢⁄[(𝑃𝐷𝑇𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 + (𝑆𝑎𝑑 − 1) ∗ 𝜌) + 𝑇𝐻𝑂−𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 ∗ 𝑡𝐻𝑂−𝑛𝑜]    (27) 

Here, 𝑆𝑎𝑑 defines the mean count of packets that are transmitted per session and 𝐿𝑢 gives the 
average size of a packet from a given node to MNs, and the packet-packet time is represented as 
𝑃𝐷𝑇𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 gives the time taken for the delivery of 𝐿𝑢  number of packets. Packet delivery time 
(PDT) is the time it takes packets to make it from a given node to the MNs, calculated by equation (27). 
𝑇𝐻𝑂−𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 is computed as a ratio in the HO μ and the mean incoming charge of the session. 

30000

25000

20000
CMM

15000 S-hDMM

GMM
10000

SDN-GMM

5000 GMM-MLOA

0
20 40 60 80 100

Average no.of transmitted  packets

 
Figure 8: Throughput versus count of packets in a session 

The comparison based on throughput performance of the proposed method and the conventional 
methods is shown in Fig. 9. Here, the packets are routed for a count of packets from 20 to 100. It 
shows the proposed method has a better throughput of 26987 Kbyte/sec, whereas other methods, 
such as S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM, give reduced throughput of 16100 Kbyte/sec, 19875 
Kbyte/sec, 22457 Kbyte/sec, and 24572 Kbyte/sec for 100 transmitted packets, respectively. 

25

20 CMM

S-hDMM

15 GMM

SDN-GMM

GMM-MLOA
10

10 20 30 40 50

Simulation time (Seconds)

 
Figure 9: Network throughput comparison as a function of the simulation time 

Throughput (Mbps)
Throughput (Kbytes/sec)



103 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

Figure 9 illustrates how network throughput and resource management performance can be 
compared. As can be seen from Figure 9, the network throughput trend follows the resource 
management extent outlined in Figure 8. Hence, the resource will be more efficiently utilized when it is 
managed within the network, thus resulting in a higher network throughput of 23.32 Mbps, where the 
conventional methods, such as S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM, have significantly lesser throughput for 
a given simulation time of 50 seconds. 

4.4 Packet loss 
 In MN, during handover, the packet loss rate is proportional to either the delay in HO or the rate at 
which packets arrive per second during the HO procedure. Suppose that Sad denote the mean count of 
the packets that are delivered in a session, then the loss rates of the proposed SDN-GMMHO are 
computed using Eq. (28). 

𝐶𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 = 𝜑 ∗ 𝑆𝑎𝑑 ∗ 𝑇𝐻𝑂−𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑦−𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚    (28) 

Whereas 𝑇𝐻𝑂−𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑦−𝑠𝑑𝑛−𝑔𝑚𝑚 denote the average HO delay of the proposed SDN-GMM method. 

400

350

300

250 CMM

200 S-hDMM

150 GMM

100 SDN-GMM

50 GMM-MLOA

0
0.12 0.16 0.2 0.24 0.28

Mobility Rate

 
Figure 10: Packet loss versus mobility rate 

According to Figure 10, the proposed method and the traditional methods result in improvements 
to HO rates of 0.12 to 0.28. The count of missing packets by the proposed method is partly the same as 
that by the existing method. The packet loss of the proposed method was 79, which is comparatively 
less than that of the existing methods, such as S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM, which have lesser 
throughput values of 377, 287 and 192, respectively, in a mobility rate of 0.28. 

4.5 Transmission rate 
In addition, the conventional methods show a decreased transmission rate and hence maintain a 

state of disconnection, whereas in the proposed method, the rate of handover is minimized, keeping 
the connection stable. 

Packet Loss



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 104 
 

12

10
CMM

8 S-hDMM

GMM

6 SDN-GMM

GMM-MLOA

4
0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Simulation time(Seconds)
 

Figure 11: Transmission rate for methods 

Figure 11 illustrates the transmission rate comparison of the proposed and conventional methods 
in terms of simulation time. Figure 11, when the HO rate is improved from 0 to 35, the transmission 
rate achieved by the proposed method is increased than the other methods. The proposed technique 
gives a higher transmission rate of 10.23 Mb/s, whereas other methods, such as S-hDMM, GMM, and 
SDN-GMM, give lesser throughput of 8.22 Mb/s, 8.78 Mb/s, 9.62 Mb/s, and 9.95 Mb/s against the 
simulation time of 30 seconds. 

4.6 Delay 
From Figure 12, the terminal starts to move from t = 0 s to 50 s. At this point in time, a handover is 

done where the delay is kept increasing in conventional methods and finally disconnected, whereas the 
proposed method found a stable state and had only a 6 ms delay in transmissions. 

14

12
CMM

10 S-hDMM

GMM

8 SDN-GMM

GMM-MLOA
6

0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Simulation time(Seconds)
 

Figure 12: Delay results comparison of methods 

Figure 12 illustrates the delay results comparison of the proposed method and the traditional 
methods in terms of simulation time. The proposed technique has a lesser delay of 10.18 ms, whereas 
other methods, such as S-hDMM, GMM, and SDN-GMM, give improved delays of 12.49 ms, 11.87 ms, 
11.21 ms, and 10.71 ms against the simulation time of 30 seconds, respectively. 

Delay(ms) Transmission Rate(Mb/Seconds)



105 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 
 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this study, an architecture for an SDN-enabled mobility model for seamless handovers and 

optimum resource management is proposed using the SDN paradigm. The Mutation Lion 
Optimization Algorithm (MLOA) is used for obtaining a global view of the network, which makes it 
more important to make decisions in an effective and optimal usage of resources. In case of seamless 
handovers, the MLOA are introduced for reducing the propagation of data through the early release 
of the OpenFlow table. In cases of optimum resource management and handovers, the proposed 
technique uses weights for Access Point, which are calculated based on factors like throughput, delay, 
and distance. Group-based Mobility Management (GMM) method, named MoMo, is proposed by 
utilizing Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) is then introduced to SDN. In order to prove the 
efficiency, the proposed method is compared with that of the conventional handover techniques over 
the Network Simulator 3(NS3) simulation environment. The results of the proposed method and 
existing methods are measured via metrics like signaling cost, handover latency, throughput, packet 
loss, transmission rate, and delay. In future, the proposed SDN-GMM method can be practical in the 
vehicular setting. The results show that SDN-based solutions represent a more effective approach for 
handling data traffic with high delay tolerance, as well as being a suitable enabling technology for 
introducing intelligence into wireless networks and providing operators with fine-grained control. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: V. Bakyalakshmi; supervision and writing: K. 
Brindha; review and editing: Swamynathan Ramakrishnan. All authors reviewed the results and 
approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Brief OS. OpenFlow-enabled SDN and network functions virtualization. Open Netw Found. 2014;17:1-2. 
2. Zuniga JC, Bernardos CJ, De La Oliva A, Melia T, Costa R, Reznik A. Distributed mobility management: A 

standards landscape. IEEE Commun Mag. 2013;51(3):80-7. 
3. Sankaran CB. Data offloading techniques in 3GPP Rel-10 networks: A tutorial. IEEE Commun Mag. 

2012;50(6):46-53. 
4. Seite P, Liu D, Yokota H, Korhonen J, Chan HA. Requirements for distributed mobility management. IETF 

RFC7333. 2014. 
5. Chan HA, Yokota H, Xie J, Seite P, Liu D. Distributed and dynamic mobility management in mobile internet: 

current approaches and issues. J Commun. 2011;6(1):4-15. 
6. Ahn CW, Chung SH. SDN‐Based Mobile Data Offloading Scheme Using a Femtocell and WiFi Networks. Mob 

Inf Syst. 2017;2017(1):5308949. 
7. Hakiri A, Gokhale A, Berthou P, Schmidt DC, Gayraud T. Software-defined networking: Challenges and 

research opportunities for future internet. Comput Netw. 2014;75:453-71. 
8. Kumar S, Agrawal GS, Sharma SK. Impact of mobility models on MANETs routing protocols. INROADS-

IJJNU. 2014;3(1s):142-7. 
9. Kumar S, Agrawal GS, Sharma SK. Impact of mobility on MANETs routing protocols using group mobility 

model. Int J Microw Wirel Technol. 2017;7(2):1-2. 
10. Guimarães DA, Frigieri EP, Sakai LJ. Influence of node mobility, recharge, and path loss on the optimized 

lifetime of wireless rechargeable sensor networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 2020;97:102025. 
11. De Nardis L, Di Benedetto MG. MoMo: a group mobility model for future generation mobile wireless 

networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03065. 2017 Apr;9. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):8 106 
 

12. Duan X, Akhtar AM, Wang X. Software-defined networking-based resource management: data offloading 
with load balancing in 5G HetNet. Eurasip J Wirel Commun Netw. 2015;2015(1):181. 

13. Yang H, Kim Y. SDN-based distributed mobility management. In 2016 international conference on 
information networking (ICOIN); 2016 Jan 13, Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia; 2016. p. 337-342. 

14. Nguyen TT, Bonnet C, Harri J. SDN-based distributed mobility management for 5G networks. In 2016 IEEE 
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference; 2016 Apr 3, Doha, Qatar; 2016. p. 1-7. 

15. Ko H, Jang I, Lee J, Pack S, Lee G. SDN-based distributed mobility management for 5G. In 2017 IEEE 
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE); 2017 Jan 8, Las Vegas, NV; 2017.p. 116-117. 

16. Jeon S, Figueiredo S, Aguiar RL, Choo H. Distributed mobility management for the future mobile networks: 
A comprehensive analysis of key design options. IEEE Access. 2017;5:11423-36. 

17. Khan MA, Dang XT, Doersch T, Peters S. Mobility management approaches for SDN-enabled mobile 
networks. Ann Telecommun. 2018;73(11):719-31. 

18. Park PW, Kim SM, Min SG. Openflow-based mobility management scheme and data structure for the 
mobility service at software defined networking. Int J Distrib Sens Netw. 2016;12(3):3674192. 

19. Cominardi L, Giust F, Bernardos CJ, De La Oliva A. Distributed mobility management solutions for next 
mobile network architectures. Comput Netw. 2017;121:124-36. 

20. Huang CM, Dao DT, Chiang MS. A Bursty Multi-node Handover scheme for mobile internet using the 
partially Distributed Mobility Management (BMH–DMM) architecture.Telecommun Syst. 2018;69(1):113-
30. 

21. Bi Y, Han G, Lin C, Guizani M, Wang X. Mobility management for intro/inter domain handover in software-
defined networks. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun. 2019;37(8):1739-54. 

22. Jaumard B, Duong HQ, Armolavicius R, Morris T, Djukic P. Efficient real-time scalable make-before-break 
network re-routing. J Opt Commun Netw. 2019;11(3):52-66. 

23. Duan X, Akhtar AM, Wang X. Software-defined networking-based resource management: data offloading 
with load balancing in 5G HetNet. Eurasip J wirel commun netw. 2015;2015(1):181. 

24. Sou SI. Mobile data offloading with policy and charging control in 3GPP core network. IEEE Trans Veh 
Technol. 2013;62(7):3481-6. 

25. Yazdani M, Jolai F. Lion optimization algorithm (LOA): a nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithm. J 
Comput Des Eng. 2016;3(1):24-36. 

26. Wang B, Jin X, Cheng B. Lion pride optimizer: An optimization algorithm inspired by lion pride behavior. 
Sci China Inf Sci. 2012;55(10):2369-89. 

27. Bilen T, Canberk B, Chowdhury KR. Handover management in software-defined ultra-dense 5G networks. 
IEEE Netw. 2017;31(4):49-55. 

28. Balfaqih M, Balfaqih Z, Shepelev V, Alharbi SA, Jabbar WA. An analytical framework for distributed and 
centralized mobility management protocols. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput. 2022;13(7):3393-405. 

29. Wie S. SDN-based Hybrid Distributed Mobility Management. J Inf Commun Converg Eng. 2019;17(2). 
30. Kumar S, Agrawal GS, Sharma SK. Impact of mobility on MANETs routing protocols using group mobility 

model. Int J Microw Wirel Technol. 2017;7(2):1-2.