ARTICLE 

Optimized Feature Weighting Framework for Multi-Document 
Summarization Using Binary Swarm Intelligence Techniques 

Vijayalakshmi P. S1,*, P. Ananthi2 and Arokiaraj Selvaraj3 

1Associate Professor, Department of Computer Applications, Dr. NGP Arts and Science College, Coimbatore, India. 
2Associate Professor, Department of Computer Technology, Kongu Engineering College, India. 
3General Manager, Delloite Middle East, Dubai, UAE. 
*Corresponding Author: Vijayalakshmi P.S. Email: vijips2605@gmail.com  

Received: 11 July 2025; Accepted: 23 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Auto-Text summarization is the process through which a compressed version of the original text 
is created. Extraction-based approaches are the methods through which important sentences and information 
are extracted from a single or multiple documents. This method selects the sentences based on the calculation 
of scores for each sentence. The process of extracting sentences that are most important is a trivial task for the 
text mining researchers. The previous works concentrated on the automatic extraction of features through 
weighted TF-IDF and dimension reduction using the centroid-based k-means clustering. This paper is intended 
to apply the extractive methods for automatic text summarization at the multi-document level using swarm 
intelligence. Particle swarm optimization is used in this research for identifying the optimal weight of the 
feature scores for differentiating between the relevant and irrelevant features. The ROUGE tool is used for the 
evaluation. The student data provided by the educational department of the US is considered for the 
experiment. The summary that are generated using the proposed methodology is compared to those of other 
methods, such as Genetic Algorithm and Ant Colony Optimization, and the TF-IDF: CBC as the benchmark 
method. The results from the experiment prove that the extracted summaries produced after the integration 
of the proposed method into TF-IDF: CBC perform better. 

KEYWORDS: Text Summarization, k-means clustering, TF-IDF, Particle Agent Swarm Optimization, ROUGGE, 
and GA-ACO. 

1 Introduction 
In the digital era, most of the information needed from a user is available as a large source of 

unstructured data. This unstructured data is normally found as large pieces of text. The volume of 
data being accumulated is increasing rapidly with respect to time. The need for automatic 
summarization of these large textual data has become vital for the efficient extraction of information 
[1]. Summaries that are man-made are termed as manual summarization, and these involve the 
process of reading and understanding the text and thereafter highlighting the important information. 
On the other hand, the summaries that are generated by machines are termed automatic 
summarization. The essentiality of automatic summaries is very much in demand owing to the size 
and complexity of these large texts. The overheads, such as information overload, time complexity, 
and accuracy, that are faced by manual methods of summarization have made the auto-
summarization methods more popular and vital. Text summarization involves the process of 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



108 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 
 

bringing in the important information extracted from a large piece or pieces of text. It takes a longer 
time and more human power to understand these texts and to extract the most relevant information 
[2]. Hence, auto-summarization methods are largely preferred in domains such as email 
categorization, news summary, article summarization, and research works etc.  

The earlier effort on an automatic text summarization system, that further developed in the late 
1950s, involved selecting important sentences from the original document and concatenating them 
into a shorter form. Automatic text summarization techniques are classified into different 
approaches. Some of these techniques are classified based on the input document used for the 
summary. Single-document summarization uses only one document to produce a single summary, 
while multi-document summarization uses many documents that are related to the same topic to 
create a single summarization. The summarization methods are broadly classified into extractive and 
abstractive summarization [3]. The former method consists of selecting the most important 
sentences from the source document and concatenating them into a shorter version. The latter is the 
technique where at least a few of the entire material is purposefully left out in the input [4]. 

The task of evaluating the quality of a summary is very important. The evaluation can be 
assessed manually and/or automatically. Manual evaluation is done by humans or automatically by 
special tools. Two categories of methods used in text summarization are extrinsic and intrinsic [5-6]. 
Extrinsic evaluation measures the efficiency and acceptability of summaries in some tasks based on 
the idea of how useful the summaries are for a given task, for example, reading comprehension or 
relevance assessment. On the other hand, intrinsic evaluation measures a summary quality of the 
system itself by comparison to some gold standard, such as human-generated summaries. The 
evaluation can be assessed manually and/or automatically. Manual evaluation is done by a human. 
The Recall-Oriented Understanding for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE), for example, is an automatic 
intrinsic evaluator of summary systems for Document Understanding [7].  

One of the easier ways for the determination of optimum feature weight is through exhaustive 
research, in which the subset of features is evaluated with the universal set of all features. This 
approach is not practical even for a feature set of a medium size. The feature extraction normally 
involves heuristic search methods to avoid the complexities. However, the optimality of the end 
subset is normally reduced [8]. Some of the methods that have attracted more researchers are the 
Genetic Algorithms, ACOs, and PSOs that collect better solutions using the knowledge obtained from 
previous steps. The genetic method of optimization is based on the natural selection process. They 
are operated similarly to natural genetics for supervising the searches in the given space [9].  

Owing to its advantages, GAs is normally used as a tool for feature extraction in text mining. PSO 
was introduced by Kennedy [10] and is based on the social and psychological behavior of swarms in 
nature. The particles in the swarm follow a simple behavior that kindles the success of the 
neighboring particles. The outcome behavior of the entire group identifies the optimum regions in a 
high-dimensional space.   

This research work proposes a Particle Agent Swarm Optimization-based text summarization 
technique for identifying the best fit weight in TF-IDF: CBC for multi-document auto text 
summarization. The evaluations are done through the ROUGE toolkit for performance measures. The 
results from experiments proved that the summaries generated after the integration of the proposed 
method into TF-IDF: CBC are better than other algorithms. The rest of the paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 gives the gist of the related works in the PSO-based summarization. Section 3 
elucidates the problem statement, and Section 4 deals with the proposed methodology in detail. 
Section 5 describes the experimental setup and the evaluation measures. Section 6 depicts the results 
obtained from experiments and discusses the same. Section 7 gives the conclusion and opens 
research problems that can be taken for future experiments. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 109 
 

2 Related Works 
The PSO method is used in the current research as a machine learning technique for feature 

extraction and to study its effect in the optimum weight calculation of the features. The scores are 
combined with the features that are produced by the PSO in the proposed method for auto-text 
summarization. Only a few studies have been carried out with the PSO method on the text 
summarization problem, and the important studies are as follows:   

PSO was successfully applied to some related problems, like text classification. The particle 
swarm optimization was also applied successfully in the feature selection problem. PSO was 
implemented for selecting the subset of features for a classification and to train the neural network 
[11]. The classification problem of the extracted features is addressed using the PSO method [12]. 
PSO was adopted for the feature extraction for the enhancement of performance of the SVMs and the 
neural network for obtaining an optimum solution to the e-learning texts [13]. PSO was deployed 
with a Support Vector Machine for the determination of parameters and to improve the accuracy of 
classification [14]. 

According to the successes of PSO in the above studies, the PSO method was deployed to 
investigate the impact of feature extraction on its structure of the summarized text [15], where the 
features used are divided into two types: “complex” features and “simple” features. Complex features 
are “sentence centrality”, “title feature”, and “word sentence score”; simple features are “keyword” 
and “first sentence similarity”. After computing each feature score, the PSO was used to identify 
which features are more effective. The score of ROUGE-1 was used to calculate the value of the fitness 
function. The dataset used for training the system comprised one hundred articles from DUC-2002. 
The PSO parameters were initialized, and the “gbests” values were computed to extract the weight of 
each feature. Results showed that complex features received higher weights than did simple features, 
which indicates that feature structure plays an important role in the feature selection process. To 
assess the results, the authors installed one human model summary as a reference and a second as a 
benchmark. The MS Word summarizing tool and the initial human-made summary are compared. 
The results proved that the PSO method performed better than the Microsoft Word tool and achieved 
accuracy closest to a human-tailored summary. The maximal margin relevance [16] (MMR) method 
is proposed to enhance summary diversity. 

3 Problem Definition 
Features are the most important entities in the summarization of texts. Considering that all the 

features are equal will result in the generation of a poor summary. Building an optimal feature 
weighting mechanism for high-quality summary generation is considered a complex task. PSO was 
proposed before to solve this problem, but when the same is surveyed, especially text summarization 
based on evolutionary and swarm intelligence algorithms, it is found that previous works established 
an unfair comparison criterion to test which evolutionary and swarm algorithm is better. In this 
study, the criteria are unified to judge which algorithm is better in reality for implementing a text 
summarizer application. 

4 Proposed Methodology 
The operational framework of this research consists of four phases: Phase 1: Feature extraction 

through TF-IDF: CBC, Phase 2: Binary Particle Swarm Based Text Summarization, Phase 3: Training 
Procedure, and Phase 4: Testing Procedure. The architecture is shown in Figure 1. 



110 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 
 

 

Figure 1: Proposed Architecture 

4.1 Binary Particle Swarm-Based Text Summarization 
The feature scoring is considered the base of the text summarization process. The particle swarm 

optimization (PSO) is used as a machine learning method to learn the feature weight from the training 
data. The extracted weights are used to adjust the feature scores. 

4.1.1 Particle Position Representation and Configuration 
The Binary-PSO is considered, where the position of the particle is represented as a binary string. 

Every bit takes the value of either 0 or 1 and represents individual features. The bit value of 1 
indicates that a feature is selected and unselected otherwise. The initial bit represents the first 
feature, and the second bit represents the second feature, and the same is followed throughout. The 
pictorial representation of the same is provided in Figure 2.   

 
Figure 2: Bit representation of features 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 111 
 

4.1.2 Particle Velocity Representation and Configuration 
The velocity of the particle is depicted in the same manner as the position of the particle, 

wherein every value of the bit is retrieved using the sigmoid function. The velocity used in the 
sigmoid is represented in equations (1) and (2), 

Vi(t +1) = w.Vi(t)+c1.r1(t).[Pi(t)−Xi(t)] +c2.r2(t).[Pg(t)−Xi(t)]     (1) 

Xi(t +1) = Xi(t)+Vi(t +1)     (2) 

In which c1 and c2 represent the positive constants and are called learning rates, and 𝑃𝑖 =
 (𝑝𝑖1, 𝑝𝑖2, . . . , 𝑝𝑖𝐷) indicates the swarm’s previous best position. r1 and r2  are the values taken 
randomly from the range [0,1]. Xi = (xi1, xi2, . . . , xiD) shows the position belonging to particle (i) in the 
space with dimension D. t denotes the number of iterations, and the weight of inertia is denoted by 
w. The best particle from the entire population is denoted by the index 𝑔,  and 𝑉𝑖 =
 (𝑣𝑖1, 𝑣𝑖2, . . . , 𝑣𝑖𝐷)shows the positions change with respect to time. If the summation pertaining to 
the factors present in the RHS of equation (1) exceeds a certain threshold, the velocity of the particle 
on every dimension is then clamped at the maximum velocity 𝑉𝑀𝑎𝑥. 

4.1.3 Binary Modulation formula 
Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm is one of the Swarm Intelligence algorithms. The Swarm 

Intelligence algorithms are used with real values. To enable PSO to search in a binary space, we need 
a modulation formula in order to modulate real values into binary values.  

𝑥    
0 1

𝑗𝑘(𝑡+1)= {1𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑗𝑘 (𝑡)≥ }  (3) 
1+exp (−𝑣𝑘)(𝑡) 

In this research, we used modulation as in equation (3) to perform this task or 0 otherwise. 

4.1.4 The Fitness Function 
The fitness function is used as a measuring unit in optimization techniques. The fitness function is 

used to determine which particle obtains the best solution and is considered the fittest value. This value 
will change if the new particle generates better fitness than the previous particle. Equation (4) shows the 
fitness function determination. The function to represent the fitness is obtained through the least degree 
of the saw particle, which is jumping off from the path, and the finest change in the strength of the particle 
in the degree of the equation. 

𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠(𝑋𝑖)  =  𝜙. 𝛾(𝑆𝑖(𝑡)) + 𝜑. (𝑛 − |𝑆𝑖(𝑡)|)     (4) 

In the above equation, 𝑆𝑖(𝑡)denotes the subset of the feature identified by the particle 𝐼  in an 
iteration 𝑡,with the length given as(𝑆𝑖(𝑡)), the fitness is calculated to measure the performance of the 
classifier (𝑆𝑖(𝑡))with the length of the subset. Φ and φ are the couple of parameters which control the 
relative weight of the classifier and the length of the subset features denoted by 𝜙 _[0,1] 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝜑 =  1 −
𝜙. This indicates that the performance of the classifier and the feature subset have contrasting effects on 
the features that are extracted. In this research, more importance is given to the classifiers’ 
performance rather than the length of the subsets. Hence, the same is set as 𝜙 = 0.8, 𝜑 = 0.2. 

4.2 Training procedure 
In this study, the PSO used 70 documents from the US education department. In the beginning, 

all the documents are dealt with initial pre-processing of sentence segmentation, tokenization, and 
removal of stopwords. Then, the Weighted TF-IDF method is used to extract the features [18]. The 



112 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 
 

scores of each sentence are then represented using the vectors as in Table 1, and the results of the 
scores obtained as used as the input for the scoring function of PSO as in equation (5). 

Table 1: Sample feature scores 

Sentence / Feature TF SL SP ND TW Total 

S1 0.68 0.57 0.42 0.24 0.81 2.72 

S2 0.48 0.47 0.28 0.67 0.74 2.64 

S3 0.27 0.42 0.68 0.81 0.42 2.60 

S… … … … … … … 

S10 0.38 0.42 0.48 0.61 0.74 2.63 

 

𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝑥𝑖) =  ∑5
𝑗=1 𝑠(𝑓𝑗) ∗ 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑝(𝑖)    (5) 

The (𝑠𝑖) denoted the score of the sentence and 𝑠𝑖 , 𝑆(𝑓𝑗) represents the score for the feature 𝐹𝑗 
and 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑖 represents the value of the 𝑏𝑖𝑡(𝑖) in the present position after calculating the scores of all 
the documents using the equation (5), and are ranked in a descending manner, and finally, the 
𝑡𝑜𝑝 𝑛 sentences are selected to frame the summary, wherein n denotes the length of the summary, which 
is pre-defined. The proposed method uses the threshold value of 20% of the size of the source text as the 
summary length. The proposed PSO makes use of the equation as in (4.5) for selecting 𝑛 sentences from 
the source for composing the summary. The summary that is generated is again used as the input for the 
fitness function. The evaluation of the summary is made, and the 𝑝𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 is identified, which represents 
the value of the evaluation of the best summary that is generated by that particular particle. The 𝑔𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 
is also calculated, which indicates the value of the evaluation of the best summary that is generated by the 
particle in the search space.   

By the end of an iteration, the particle’s position that has the value of 𝑔𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 will be selected as the 
vector for the best selected feature in every document. The final feature weights are calculated over the 
vectors of the feature weights of all documents in the data collection. 

𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑦 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟∗𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑑𝑜𝑐𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ 𝑜𝑓 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦 =      (6) 

100

4.3 Testing procedure 
The goal of employing the PSO is to find and optimize the corresponding weight 𝑤𝑗 of each 

feature 𝑓𝑗. Equation 7 calculates the feature weights, 

𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 − 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (𝑠𝑖) =  ∑5
𝑗=1 𝑤𝑗 ∗ 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑝(𝑓𝑗 (𝑠𝑖))     (7) 

Where score weights (𝑠𝑖) is the score of sentence s, 𝑤𝑗 is the weight of the feature 𝑗 produced by 
PSO, 𝑗 is the number of features, and is a function that calculates the score of the feature 𝑗. The testing 
procedure used 30 documents from the DUC2002 data set. The testing procedure is begin with input 
document, then implementing the preprocessing process (segmentation, tokenization, remove stop word 
and stem the word), then extracting features for each sentence, then modify the score of each feature 
based on the features weights that produced in training process, the score of each sentence is then 
calculated for all documents as in equation (7) followed by the ordering of these sentences in an 
descending manner and to select the 𝑡𝑜𝑝 𝑛 sentence and re-ordering to the original order of the source 
document is done. The ROUGE evaluation measures are used for performance evaluation. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 113 
 

5 Experimental environment and metrics 
This research is based on the functional approximation (random research) approach using an 

intelligent swarm algorithm named "particle swarm optimization". The PSO algorithm is provided 
with a learning approach (feature weighting). The PSO used to obtain appropriate feature weights. 
We have set the particle swarm optimization parameters as follows: number of particles=30, 
maximum number of iterations=500. The commonly used information retrieval metrics of precision, 
recall, and F-Score. The summary that is generated by humans is the best choice for evaluation. 
Therefore, the generated summaries in this study were evaluated and compared with the human-
generated summaries.  

Precision (P) is calculated as the number of sentences that are intersected in-between the 
summary generated by the system and that of the human, divided by the number of sentences in the 
summary generated through the system. It is calculated using equation (8). 

|𝑆𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦|∩|𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦|
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 =      (8) 

|𝑆𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦|

Recall denoted by R is the number of sentences that are intersected in-between the summary 
generated by the system and the summary generated by a human, divided by the number of 
sentences in the model. It is calculated using equation (9). 

|𝑆𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑈𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦|∩|𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦|
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 =      (9) 

|𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑦|

The F-score maintains the performance of the system based on the “Precision” and “Recall” 
values and is calculated using equation (10). 

2∗𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛∗𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝐹 =      (10) 

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙

5.1 Rouge: method of evaluation 
The ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) is an evaluation system for the 

measurement of the quality of the summaries in comparison with the human-created summaries 
[17]. The ROUGE tool depends on counting n-gram co-occurrences in the system summary and in the 
reference summary. ROUGE provides four different measures, namely ROUGE-N, ROUGE-L, ROUGE-
W, ROUGE-S, and ROUGE-SU. 

5.2 Rouge-N 
ROUGE-N measures co-occurrences of n-grams. The ROUGE-N score can be calculated as: 

∑(𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑛) ∗ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑚)
𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑔𝑢𝑒 − 𝑁 =  𝑛 ∈𝑆 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑔𝑟𝑎 𝑛    (11) 

∑(𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑛)𝑛 ∈𝑆∗𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)𝑛

Where S is the sentence taken as a reference, n denotes the length of the gram, and 
𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ) is the 𝑛 − 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑠 that are shared between a given set of reference summaries, and 
the 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)is the total count of the 𝑛 − 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑠 in-between the set of summaries that are 
present in the system-generated summary. 

5.3 Results and Discussions 
This chapter describes the results of the applied PSO algorithm in text summarization and 

compares the generated summary after applying feature weights with other algorithms, which are 
the Ant-colony algorithm and Genetic algorithm; the Differential Evolution algorithm is used as a 
benchmark. The H2-H1 Compression method is used as a benchmark too; this method is produced 



114 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 
 

by comparing the human summary called (H2) with the reference human summary called (H1). This 
compression is established to evaluate the summary against human performance. These algorithms 
used the same five statistical features (Title Feature, Sentence Length, Sentence Position, Numerical 
Data, and Thematic Words) and the same data set. The ROUGE packet is used to evaluate the obtained 
results. When implementing the testing process, we used the ROUGE-N evaluation measure. ROUGE-
N measure counts all occurring (shared) words. The generated summaries by these algorithms (PSO, 
GA, ACO) are compared with the DE algorithm summary. Tables 2 and 3 compare the three methods 
using ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2. Average recall (avg-R), average precision (avg-P), and average F-measure 
(avg-F) are calculated for each method. Figures 1 and 2 visualize the same results obtained. 

 

Table 2: Results based on ROGUE 1 

Method Performance Measures 

 Avg-P Avg-R Avg-F-Score 

H2-H1 96.1 96.8 96.8 

DE 87.4 86.8 86.8 

ACO 81.2 84.6 82.5 

GA 91.2 92.4 93.4 

PASO 95.1 96.2 94.8 

 

 
Figure 3: Comparative results – ROUGE 1 

Table 3 shows the results obtained from the ROUGE 2 evaluation. It is seen that the proposed 
method has the closest proximity to handwritten summaries when compared to all the other methods 
under discussion. Figure 4 depicts the same in a graphical format. 

Table 3: Results based on ROGUE 2  

Method Performance Measures 

 Avg-P Avg-R Avg-F-Score 

H2-H1 97.2 96.8 97.4 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 115 
 

DE 89.2 86.6 84.8 

ACO 84.7 83.8 87.4 

GA 90.4 91.7 90.9 

PASO 96.4 95.2 96.4 

        

Figure 4: Comparative results – ROUGE 2 

6 Conclusion 
The performance of feature-weighting in automatic text summarization has been proven to 

generate high-quality summarization. In this research, binary PSO was used to obtain feature 
weights. The standard version of PSO used real values for the position and velocity of the particles. 
The modulation function is used to modulate the real values into binary values to determine the 
inclusion of features for weighting. Binary PSO is used to determine a better particle for each 
document. The structure of the particle includes five bits; each bit represents one feature. After the 
end of PSO iterations, the average weight of each feature is calculated, called the feature-weight. The 
proposed method is applied to the TF-IDF model, and the generated summary in this stage is 
compared with other algorithms (GA, DE, and ACO). The experiments were conducted on the large 
dataset from US educational records, and the evaluation was done using the ROUGE tools. The 
experiments prove that the proposed methodology performs better than other Genetic Algorithms 
and ACOs.   

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: Vijayalakshmi P. S; supervision and writing: P. 
Ananthi; review and editing: Arokiaraj Selvaraj. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final 
version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 



116 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):9 
 

References 
1. Alzuhair A, Al-Dhelaan M. An approach for combining multiple weighting schemes and ranking methods 

in graph-based multi-document summarization. IEEE Access. 2019;7:120375-86. 
2. Cai X, Li W. Ranking through clustering: An integrated approach to multi-document summarization. IEEE 

Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. 2013;21(7):1424-33. 
3. Goyal P, Behera L, McGinnity TM. A context-based word indexing model for document summarization. 

IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng. 2012;25(8):1693-705. 
4. Yan S, Wan X. SRRank: Leveraging semantic roles for extractive multi-document summarization. IEEE 

Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. 2014;22(12):2048-58. 
5. Indu M, Kavitha KV. Review on text summarization evaluation methods. In 2016 international conference 

on research advances in integrated navigation systems (RAINS); 2016 May 6, Bangalore, India; 2016. p. 1-
4. 

6. Gupta P, Tiwari R, Robert N. Sentiment analysis and text summarization of online reviews: A survey. In 
2016 International conference on communication and signal processing (ICCSP); 2016 Apr 6, 
Melmaruvathur, India; 2016. p. 0241-0245. 

7. He T, Chen J, Ma L, Gui Z, Li F, Shao W, Wang Q. ROUGE-C: A fully automated evaluation method for multi-
document summarization. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on Granular Computing; 2008 Aug 26, 
Hangzhou, China; 2008. p. 269-274. 

8. Modi S, Oza R. Review on abstractive text summarization techniques (ATST) for single and multi-
documents. In 2018 International Conference on Computing, Power and Communication Technologies 
(GUCON); 2018 Sep 28, Greater Noida, India; 2018. p. 1173-1176. 

9. Gnanaprasanambikai L, Munusamy N. Survey of genetic algorithm effectiveness in intrusion detection. In 
2017 International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control (I2C2); 2017 Jun 23, Coimbatore, 
India; 2017. p. 1-5. 

10. Kennedy J, Eberhart R. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of ICNN'95-international conference 
on neural networks; 1995 Nov 27, Perth, WA, Australia; 1995. Vol. 4, pp. 1942-1948. 

11. Eberhart RC, Shi Y, Kennedy J. Swarm intelligence. Elsevier; 2001 Apr 11. 
12. Lee JH, Kim JW, Song JY, Kim YJ, Jung SY. A novel memetic algorithm using modified particle swarm 

optimization and mesh adaptive direct search for PMSM design. IEEE Trans Magn. 2015;52(3):1-4. 
13. Sun J, Palade V, Wu X, Fang W. Multiple sequence alignment with hidden Markov models learned by 

random drift particle swarm optimization. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2013;11(1):243-57. 
14. Abdelhafiz A, Behjat L, Ghannouchi FM. Generalized memory polynomial model dimension selection using 

particle swarm optimization. IEEE Microw Wirel Compon Lett. 2018;28(2):96-8. 
15. Ding W, Fang W. Target tracking by sequential random draft particle swarm optimization algorithm. In 

2018 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2); 2018 Sep 16, Kansas City, MO, USA; 2018. p. 1-7. 
16. Guo S, Sanner S. Probabilistic latent maximal marginal relevance. In Proceedings of the 33rd international 

ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval; 2010 Jul 19, 2019. p. 833-
834. 

17. Liu F, Liu Y. Exploring correlation between ROUGE and human evaluation on meeting summaries. IEEE 
Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. 2009;18(1):187-96. 

18. Robinson J, Saravanan V, A weighted TF-IDF Uni-Gram Model for Automated Feature Extraction in Multi – 
Dimensional and Unstructured Big Data. Test Eng Manag. 2020;317-329.