ARTICLE 

Refined Gabor Feature Extraction Combined with Optimized Bayesian 
Classification for Facial Expression Analysis 

K. Nirmala Devi1,*, S. Thanga Prasath2 and Shanmugan Joghee3 

1Associate Professor, Department of CSE-Data Science, Madanapalle Institute of Technology & Science (MITS) - Deemed to 
be University, Madanapalle, Andhra Pradesh - 517325, India. 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Artificial Intelligence, Madanapalle Institute of Technology & Science (MITS), Deemed 
to be University,  
Madanapalle, Andhra Pradesh - 517325, India. 
3Professor & Discipline leader - Marketing, School of Business, Horizon University College, Al Jurf, Ajman, United Arab 
Emirates. 
*Corresponding Author: K. Nirmala Devi. Email: nirmaladevik.cse@gmail.com  

Received: 30 July 2025; Accepted: 25 October 2025; Published: 22 December 2025 

ABSTRACT: Face recognition is a subdomain of computational biometrics, which is an automated technique 
for verifying the identity of a human based on some parameters, like the pattern in the iris and face dimensions. 
It is a multi-faceted process as there are only a limited images available for the purpose of training, and different 
images are obtained through various conditions and surroundings. There is a constant challenge that 
researchers face, which is how to efficiently handle the sensitivity of the classifier under illumination, 
expressions, and performance under low-resolution images. Conventional methods of face recognition have a 
lower accuracy in the classification, and hence, this paper proposes a Modified Gabor Filtering technique based 
on NB classifier (MGF+ENBA) for overcoming the issue. The MGF technique extracts only the most important 
features from the available data efficiently. The ENBA algorithm is then used for the classification of facial 
expression in a more accurate way, with the emotion detection, such as sad, happy, angry, fear, and neutral 
emotional features. The experiments were performed using the Cohn-Kanade data and the JAFFE database. The 
results prove that the proposed technique performs better than the other methods in terms of precision, recall, 
and F-measure, which proves improved accuracy. 

KEYWORDS: Facial expression, Modified Gabor Filter with Enhanced Naïve Bayes Algorithm (MGF+ENBA), 
image processing. 
 

1 Introduction 
Facial expression detection systems are largely being researched in the AI domain. A lot of facial 

expression recognition (FER) applications apply traditional ML methods for the feature extraction, 
and these traditional methods have an overhead of poor accuracy when new images are tested. Many 
Artificial Intelligence-based systems are being developed for the detection of facial expressions for 
improving business domains, such as in customer attention marketing, health monitoring, and other 
intelligent systems based on emotions. Owing to a great demand and lack of supply, the facial 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



118 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 
 

recognition systems with emotional intelligence have attracted a large volume of research 
community towards the computer vision domain [1-2].  

Human emotions often facilitate more meaning than words. Thus, the importance of 
understanding emotions is crucial in the context of social communications. Many techniques are 
available for the detection of emotions, such as voice recognition, NLP, and complex techniques, 
including EEGs. However, a much easier and stronger way for emotion detection is through facial 
expressions. The common facial expressions include anger, happiness, fear, surprise, and disgust, and 
more complex expressions which have the combination of basic emotions are still under 
investigation [3-4]. Hence, a utility that can detect the motions from facial expressions is in great 
demand.  

The conventional method has used feature selection based on hand-crafted techniques. These 
include techniques such as the Local Binary Patterns (LBP), the non-negative factorization (NMF), 
and spatial learning [5-6]. In the year 2013, various competitions on FER [21] and emotion detection 
were conducted, which have largely collected enough training data in real-time [7-8]. Owing to the 
great advancements in chip-level technologies and well-architected networks, various research has 
commenced in the usage of deep learning methods that have achieved a lot in the accurate detection 
of emotions [9-10]. Also, given the effectiveness of the training of data, deep learning has shown a 
dramatic efficiency for handling the most challenging issues in emotional detection.  

In any image processing technique, feature selection plays a vital role in the classification part. 
If there are no sufficient features, the performance of the classifier will be poor. In most cases of facial 
expression classification, a large number of features will be generated, and only the significant 
features will be needed for the classification, which is done through optimization techniques [11-12]. 
Among the famous techniques, the Gabor Wavelet Feature extraction has attracted many researchers 
owing to its performance. Although widely adopted, the computational cost is very high for the 
coevolution of facial images with multi-bank filters for extracting the scalar and orientation 
parameters. Further, this technique suffers from a couple of major hindrances, such as the bandwidth 
of the GF is always limited to a single octave, and the filters are not optimized. These require the 
intervention of a log form in GF filters for efficient feature extraction.  

In order to overcome this hindrance, this paper proposes a modified Gabor Filtering technique 
based on an NB classifier (MGF+ENBA) for overcoming the issue. The MGF technique extracts only 
the most important features from the available data efficiently. The ENBA algorithm is then used for 
the classification of facial expression in a more accurate way, with the emotion detection, such as sad, 
happy, angry, fear, and neutral emotional features. The rest of the paper is organized in the following 
manner. Section 2 provides the gist of important works in the literature on emotion detection, Section 
3 explains the proposed method in detail, Section 4 elaborates on the results and discussion, and 
Section 5 concludes the research. 

2 Related Works 
Kim et al [15] gave special attention to the utilization of contrast representation, which can 

embed a distinct feature factor for a discriminative intent. The contrast representation that embeds 
a deep neural network is used for the comparison of the given image with that of a reference. The 
authors attempted to use a generic reference that is estimated from the given image. As a 
consequence, the DNNs are deployed, which can combine to form an iterative model that has an end-
to-end training. In the proposed network, an attempt to disintegrate the expressive factor in a couple 
of steps, which includes the learning development framework, is carried out. The experiments were 
carried out using public data sets available, and it is seen that the proposed method has high detection 
accuracy.  



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 119 
 

Dewi et al [16] performed a critical review on the introduction of facial emotions and developed 
the LGBP-TOP combined with SVM, which tends to focus on the images of faces and lips alone. A novel 
algorithm was developed for extracting the features of lips and eyes using the 3D blocks, which is 
then used as the input for the LGBP-TOP technique. Later, the results are classified by using the SVM 
technique. The experimental results proved an overall accuracy of 82% and found to perform better 
than the entire face and also specific areas such as eyes and lips.  

Luo et al [17] presented the PCA method, which is based on statistical analysis that is extracted 
from the grey scales of the full image. The grey-scale features are highly sensitive towards the 
environment, and hence, a hybrid method that combines the PCA and LBP was proposed. The LBP is 
determined to extract the locally available grey features on the regions surrounding the mouth and 
eyes. The SVM methods are used for the detection of facial emotions. The experimental results prove 
that the proposed method can able to classify the various expressions more effectively and can 
achieve a higher rate of recognition than the present traditional methods.  

Krestinkaya et al [18] used the simplest method for feature selection, which is also effective. The 
authors have proposed a straightforward technique for the recognition of emotions to reduce the 
issue of the inter-class mismatch among the pixels during the process of classification. The proposed 
method uses the application of normalizing the pixels for the removal of offsets caused due to 
intensity, followed by the Min-Max metrics in a nearest classifier that is competent for the outlier 
suppression of features, which forms the outliers. The experimental results indicate that there is a 
significant improvement in the performance of 18% when the Min_max classification process is 
tested on the JAFFE base. The proposed technique outperforms all the other existing methods that 
are based on template matching. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
The main objective of the proposed Modified Gabor Filter with NB Algorithm (MGF+ENBA) is to 

improve the FER performance.   

3.1 Image Dataset 
All the facial emotion classification sets that are used in the proposed method are from a couple 

of databases, the JAFFE [19] and Cohn-Kanade [20]. The former database contains 239 images of 7 
basic facial expressions. These images are taken from the female models belonging to Japan. The 
emotions expressed in each of the pictures are tested for their subjectivity on 60 different volunteers. 
The sample set of images is shown in Figure 1. 

 
Figure 1: Sample static images from the JAFFE database 



120 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 
 

 
Figure 2: Image sequences from the Cohn-Kanade database 

3.2 Image Acquisition 
The images that are used in the proposed method are static in nature. In order to capture the 

images of various expressions, a Panasonic model of camera with a focal length of 7mm is used. The 
JPEG format is used for images with 24-bit coloring. The resolution was fixed as 4320*3240 pixels. 
The maximum distance between the camera and the person was kept at 4 feet, and the images of 
seven basic expressions of each of the persons were taken. The image sequence is shown in Figure 2. 

3.3 Image Preprocessing 
The pre-processing is an important step in the image processing and not an exception in the case of 

facial expression detection. Pre-processing aims to pick out the images that have normal intensity with 
uniform shapes and size, and represent only the face that has emotion. The pre-processing helps in 
reducing the effect of illumination and as well as lighting. The representation of the expression can be 
difficult to translate and rotate. To overcome these hindrances of the pointless changes, the facial images 
are geometrically processed before entering classification. The pre-processing technique becomes more 
important in the FER task. The objective of pre-processing is to gather images that have normal intensity 
and uniform size and shape, and depict only the face expressions.  

The preprocessing is also expected to remove the effect of lighting. The area pertaining to the face of 
a given image is detected using the Viola-Jones method using the AdaBoost algorithm. The method uses 
an object detection technique that provides a comprehensive detection of objects in real time. It is initially 
designed for the issue of face detection. The significant features that are used by the viola are obtained 
from the pixels that are selected from a rectangular area, which are imposed over the picture, and show 
a high level of sensitivity for the vertical and horizontal lines. AdaBoost has an adaptive learning 
mechanism that can be used in conjunction with all other learning methods for performance 
improvement. AdaBoost is considered adaptive as the subsequent classifiers are built iteratively and are 
made to fix the instances that are misclassified by the former classifiers. At every iteration, a distributed 
weight is updated in such a way that the weights of every incorrect classification are increased, which 
enables the new classification to be focused.  

The last step in the pre-processing phase is the detection of a facial picture that has emotion within 
the maximum intensity level of a given emotion. The mutual information-based method is used for face 
detection. For every frame, this information present in-between the present frame and the initial one is 
computed, and the particular frame that has the mutual kind of information is then selected as the one 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 121 
 

that represents a particular emotion with the maximum level of intensity. At last, the images are brought 
back to the initial size. Figure 4 shows images after the preprocessing. 

 
Figure 3: Images after the pre-processing step 

3.4 Feature extraction using Modified Gabor Filters (MGF) 

The Gabor Filters (GF) are generally considered as one of the best choices for getting local frequency 
information. However, they commonly suffer from a couple of important limitations. The total bandwidth 
in the case of a GF is limited to a single octave, and also, these filters are not optimal if one of them seeks 
spectral information that has more localization. Log-based GFs help to overcome this limitation. The DC 
component is nullified here and can be built with an approximate bandwidth that can be able to produce 
the filter that has minimal spatial extent. Log-based filters in the frequency issue are defined in terms of 
polar bi-coordinates using H(f, θ) = Hf × Hθ, where Hf depicts the radial item and Hθ, the angular 
component. 

𝑓
−[ln( )]2

𝑓
𝐻(𝑓, 𝜃) = exp⁡{ 0 −(𝜃−𝜃 )2

𝜎 }exp⁡{ 0    
𝑓  (1) 

2[ln( )]2 2𝜎2
𝜃

𝑓0

Here, the f() is the frequency at the center of the filter, and θ0 represents the direction of the filter. Σf 
is the constant value that defines the bandwidth (B) of the octaves. The coefficients of the MGF are then 
calculated in an off-line speedup. The GF filters are with different orientations and are employed through 
the coefficients that are calculated respectively. This gives a variety of filters. 

 

Figure 4: Eye images used for training and testing 



122 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 
 

 

Figure 5: Mouth images used for training and testing 

3.5 FER classification using Enhanced Naïve Bayes Algorithm (ENBA)  
 

The NB classifier is based on the probability that has displayed effectiveness in many problems 
of classification [21]. The NB classifiers are simple but are effective in classification, which is based 
on Bayes' theorem. The Naive Bayes theorem is trained by using the images that are captured in a 
supervised learning environment. It is assumed that the presence of a given feature in a class is not 
related to the presence of any other feature. If c represents the class variable, then the features are 
represented using the set {f1,f2,…, fk}, and the decision of the classifier is made by using the formula. 

𝐶 = argmax{𝑝(𝑐)∏𝑘
𝑗=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)}    (2) 

𝑐

Where the p(c) represents the total samples in the set {c} / the total no of samples is the 
conditional table that is learnt in the example, and k represents the feature vector length. Although 
there is an existence of independent assumptions, the NB has proven to be a good choice for 
classification for real-time data, in par with many complex classifiers. The overall architecture of the 
proposed scheme is given in Fig. 6. 

4 Experimental Result 
The JAFFE repository has a total of 596 image sequences ranging with 124 subjects in the age 

range between 18-35. The DB includes faces that show the basic 7 emotions for which there were 
{45,98,56,58,78,35,142} images, respectively. The proposed method is compared with that of the 
Nearest Neighbor Classification and SVM for evaluating the JAFFE database along the MMSNN 
algorithm. The performance metrics chosen are precision, recall, and F-Measure as measures of 
accuracy. 

4.1 Precision 
The precision can be viewed as the computational parameter of accuracy or a quality, and is 

calculated using the formula, 

True⁡positive⁡
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = ⁡     (3) 

True⁡positive+False⁡positive



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 123 
 

JAFFE (JF) and Cohn-

Kanade (C-K) databases 

Image Acquisition 

 

Image pre-processing  

AdaBoost learning 

Normalize the intensity 

Feature extraction 

  
Modified Gabor filter 

Anger 

Extract most 
Sad 

informative features 

Fear 

Classify FER expressions using 

enhanced naïve bayes Happy  

Performance evaluation  
Neutral 

Surprise 
 

Figure 6: Overall block diagram of the proposed system 

The recall is the measure of completeness, or in other words, it is a quality parameter. Usually, the 
high value of precision indicates that the algorithm has given back more relevant results. In the 
classification problem, the precision of a given class is the total count of true positives divided by the 
total elements that belong to the positive class. 

From Figure 7, it is observed that the plot is drawn taking the existing and the proposed method 
and compared for its precision. In the X axis, the methods are assigned, and in the Y axis, the values of 
precision are plotted. It is observed that the proposed method has more precision than the other 
popular methods, such as the HMM and SVM. This concludes that the proposed method can increase 
facial expressions. 



124 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 
 

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

HMM SVM MGF+ENBA

Methods
 

Figure 7: Precision comparison 

4.2 Recall 
Recall is generally defined as the no of appropriate documents received by a given search divided 

by the total count of existing such documents, and is calculated as, 

True⁡positive⁡
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = ⁡     (4) 

True⁡positive+False⁡negative

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0
HMM SVM MGF+ENBA

Methods
 

Figure 8: Recall 

From Figure 8, it is seen that the comparative metric is evaluated between the proposed and the 
existing method. In the X axis, the methods are assigned, and in the Y axis, the values of recall are 
plotted. It is observed that the proposed method has more precision than the other popular methods, 
such as the HMM and SVM. This concludes that the proposed method MGF+ENBA can increase the 
detection performance of the facial expressions, such as sad, happy, anger, fear, neutral, and surprise 
expressions, accurately for the given databases. 

4.3 F-measure 
𝐹1-score calculated as, 

2×precision×recall
F1 − score =     (5) 

precision+recall

Recall Precision



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 125 
 

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0
HMM SVM MGF+ENBA

Methods
 

Figure 9: F-measure 

From Figure 9, it is seen that the comparative metric is evaluated between the proposed and the 
existing method. In the X axis, the methods are assigned, and in the Y axis, the values of F-Measure 
are plotted. It is observed that the proposed method has more precision than the other popular 
methods, such as the HMM and SVM. This concludes that the proposed method MGF+ENBA can 
increase the detection performance of the facial expressions, such as sad, happy, anger, fear, neutral, 
and surprise expressions, accurately for the given databases. 

4.4 Accuracy 
Accuracy is the correctness of a given model, and it is calculated as the total count of actual 

parameters (Tp + Tn)of classification that are segregated by the sum of all of the classification’s 
parameters Tp + Tn + Fp + Fn).⁡The same is computed as, 

Tp+Tn
Accuracy⁡ =     (6) 

(Tp+Tn+Fp+Fn)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0
HMM SVM MGF+ENBA

Methods  
Figure 10: Accuracy 

From Figure 10, it is seen that the comparative metric is evaluated between the proposed and 
the existing method. In the X axis, the methods are assigned, and in the Y axis, the values of accuracy 
are plotted. It is observed that the proposed method has more precision than the other popular 
methods, such as the HMM and SVM. This concludes that the proposed method MGF+ENBA can 
increase the detection performance of the facial expressions, such as sad, happy, anger, fear, neutral, 
and surprise expressions, accurately for the given databases. 

5 Conclusion 
In this study, an efficient method for the calculation of an accurate FER rate using the MGF+ENBA 

technique is presented. The FERs are based on the hybrid facial regions, which are taken for 

Accuracy(%) F-measure



126 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 
 

investigation. The part of the face that shows the most discriminative information on facial emotional 
expression classification. The vector representing the features is extracted from the original image. 
Then, the significant features are selected based on the mutual information. These are classified using 
the ENBA classifier. The experiments are carried out using the JAFFE database images, and it is found 
that the proposed MGF+ENBA algorithm gives more accuracy and better performance than other 
competitive methods, such as HMM and SVM algorithms. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: K. Nirmala Devi; supervision and writing: S. 
Thanga Prasath; review and editing: Shanmugan Joghee. All authors reviewed the results and 
approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Zeng N, Zhang H, Song B, Liu W, Li Y, Dobaie AM. Facial expression recognition via learning deep sparse 

autoencoders. Neurocomputing. 2018;273:643-9. 
2. Yang H, Ciftci U, Yin L. Facial expression recognition by de-expression residue learning. In Proceedings of 

the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2018. p. 2168-2177. 
3. A. Kołakowska, A. Landowska, M. Szwoch, W. Szwoch, and M. R. Wrobel, ´ Human-Computer Systems 

Interaction: Backgrounds and Applications 3, ch. Emotion Recognition and Its Applications, pp. 51–62. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014.  

4. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. 
Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2012;25. 

5. Liu P, Han S, Meng Z, Tong Y. Facial expression recognition via a boosted deep belief network. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2014. p. 1805-1812. 

6. Zhao G, Pietikainen M. Dynamic texture recognition using local binary patterns with an application to facial 
expressions. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2007;29(6):915-28. 

7. Goodfellow IJ, Erhan D, Carrier PL, Courville A, Mirza M, Hamner B, Cukierski W, Tang Y, Thaler D, Lee DH, 
Zhou Y. Challenges in representation learning: A report on three machine learning contests. In 
International conference on neural information processing; 2013 Nov 3, Berlin; 2013. p. 117-124. 

8. Dhall A, Ramana Murthy OV, Goecke R, Joshi J, Gedeon T. Video and image-based emotion recognition 
challenges in the wild: Emotiw 2015. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on international conference on 
multimodal interaction; 2015 Nov 9, 2015. p. 423-426. 

9. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. 
Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2012;25. 

10. Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1409.1556. 2014 Sep 4. 

11. Rifai S, Vincent P, Muller X, Glorot X, Bengio Y. Contractive auto-encoders: Explicit invariance during 
feature extraction. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning; 2011 Jun 28, 
2011. p. 833-840. 

12. Masci J, Meier U, Cireşan D, Schmidhuber J. Stacked convolutional auto-encoders for hierarchical feature 
extraction. In International conference on artificial neural networks; 2011 Jun 14, Berlin; 2011. p. 52-59. 

13. Knyazev B, Shvetsov R, Efremova N, Kuharenko A. Convolutional neural networks pretrained on large face 
recognition datasets for emotion classification from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04598. 2017 Nov 13. 

14. Ciregan D, Meier U, Schmidhuber J. Multi-column deep neural networks for image classification. In 2012 
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2012 Jun 16, Providence, RI, USA; 2012. p. 
3642-3649. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2025;2(2):10 127 
 

15. Kim Y, Yoo B, Kwak Y, Choi C, Kim J. Deep generative-contrastive networks for facial expression 
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07140. 2017 Mar 21. 

16. Dewi RR, Sthevanie F, Arifianto A. Face expression recognition using local Gabor binary pattern three 
orthogonal planes (LGBP-TOP) and support vector machine (SVM) method. In Journal of Physics: 
Conference Series; 2019. Vol. 1192, No. 1, p. 012048. 

17. Luo Y, Wu CM, Zhang Y. Facial expression recognition based on fusion feature of PCA and LBP with SVM. 
Optik. 2013;124(17):2767-70. 

18. Krestinskaya O, James AP. Facial emotion recognition using min-max similarity classifier. In 2017 
International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI); 2017 
Sep 13, Udupi, India; 2017. p. 752-758. 

19. Kanade T, Cohn JF, Tian Y. Comprehensive database for facial expression analysis. In Proceedings fourth 
IEEE international conference on automatic face and gesture recognition (cat. No. PR00580); 2000 Mar 
28, Grenoble, France; 2000. p. 46-53. 

20. Azcarate A, Hageloh F, Sande K, Valenti R. Automatic facial emotion recognition. Universiteit van 
Amsterdam. 2005 Jun:1-6. 

21. Rish I. An empirical study of the naive Bayes classifier. In IJCAI 2001 workshop on empirical methods in 
artificial intelligence; 2001 Aug 4, 2001. Vol. 3, No. 22, pp. 41-46.