ARTICLE 

Optimized Neural Fusion Architecture for Secure Data Validation and 
Cryptographic Key Regulation in Advanced Cloud Ecosystems 

Niranchana Radhakrishnan1,*, C. Viji2 and Balusamy Nachiappan3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Alliance School of Advanced Computing, Alliance 
University, Anekal, Bengaluru, Karnataka 562106, India. 
2Associate Professor, Alliance School of Advanced Computing, Alliance University, Anekal, Bengaluru, Karnataka 562106, 
India. 
3Tech Lead, Prologis, USA. 
*Corresponding Author: Niranchana Radhakrishnan. Email: niranchana.r14@gmail.com  

Received: 07 July 2024; Accepted: 15 September 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: Cloud computing allows Internet users to access highly scalable services based on their needs. 
Cloud services feature a major advantage, which allows users’ data to be processed remotely in machines that 
users have little knowledge about, and these are neither owned nor operated by them. This innovative 
technology is undoubtedly advantageous; however, there is an element of fear where users have no control 
over their own information. In addition, this loss of control can allow attackers to hack user information and 
thus become a major obstacle while embracing cloud services. To resolve this issue first, a new Centralized 
Cloud Information Accountability Integrity with Imperialist Competitive Key Generation Algorithm (CCIAI-
ICKGA) and attack detection has been suggested to check and track actual usage of users’ data that is part of 
the cloud environment. Second, every end user maintains a set of both public information-related and private 
information-related keys dependent upon Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based Encryption (CP-ABE) with key 
generation while deploying the ICKGA and trapdoor generator. Third, at the user and cloud levels, using a 
trapdoor generator, data integrity is maintained. Fourth, the Dynamically Weighted Ensemble Neural Networks 
(DWENN) classifier is deployed to enable effective attack detection. Log records structure is updated as per the 
above to additionally guarantee user data integrity as well as dependability. Framework extension is carried 
out to execute a security analysis that helps in the detection of all possible attacks. Inferences are finally drawn 
on the basis of novel experiments, and a comprehensive and extensive evaluation of the system’s performance 
is done to ensure parameters set are met. Results additionally provide the basis to carry out further 
experimental research, and they also show the competence and efficacy of the CCIAI-ICKGA framework 
proposed in this research. 

KEYWORDS: Cloud Computing (CC), Accountability, Data sharing, Trapdoor Generator, Centralized Cloud 
Information Accountability (CCIA), Imperialist Competitive Key Generation Algorithm (ICKGA), Attack 
Detection, Dynamically Weighted Ensemble Neural Networks (DWENN), Extensible Markup Language (XML), 
Java Archive (JAR).  

1 Introduction 
Cloud computing offers an innovative approach that supplements the present consumption and 

delivery model for Information Technology (IT) services that are dependent on the Internet. This is 
done by offering dynamically scalable services and generally virtualized resources over the Internet. 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



2 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

As of the present time, there exists a host of well-known marketable and distinct cloud computing 
services, which include Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Yahoo, and Salesforce [1]. Users determine the 
details of the services to be provided, as it is not mandatory for them to possess expertise regarding 
the technological infrastructure. This is because users do not actually know the workings of machines 
that process and host their data. Though users benefit from the new cloud computing services and 
technology, their concern about having no control over their own information cannot be negated. 
Over the clouds, the data processing is usually outsourced, resulting in many problems associated 
with reliability and managing personally identifiable information. These inhibitions are a major 
concern that users face while adopting cloud services [2]. 

Data calculations and loss of control over data engender security concerns for companies, which 
disrupts the ease of access and extensive adaptability and technological abilities of a public cloud. 
Cloud computing users face loss of control over information while using the storage platform to 
overcome their fears, maintain and access control over data (distinct data and the data shared among 
a set of users via the open cloud) [3]. Additionally, both data privacy and data confidentiality are 
highly recommended to customers [4]. Management of data confidentiality by users also prevents 
the respective cloud to learn any information and gathering relevant customer-related data.   

Cryptography is a distinctive tool that ensures data confidentiality and user privacy services [4]. 
Data Encryption is usually performed before cloud storage. Access control, key management, 
encryption, and decryption processes responsibility lies with customers for guaranteeing data 
security [5]. Though if data is required to be shared in groups, cryptographic services must be flexible 
so that many users can be managed simultaneously. Keys and Access control must be managed to 
ensure and safeguard data privacy and confidentiality [6]. In a group, data handling is comparatively 
advantageous than a two-party communication or handling of data that belongs to an individual user. 
Present, leaving, and freshly joined group members are likely to pose an internal danger that can 
possibly violate data privacy and data confidentiality [6]. Generally, insider threats pose more 
collateral damage to data and information as they are initiated by trusted entities that have access. 
Usually, existing members trust insider entities, and research communities attempt to resolve issues 
posed by outsider attackers. Hence, several security issues surface on account of various users in any 
group. In order to address users’ concerns, an effective attack detection mechanism must be 
developed and deployed so that end users who access the cloud can easily evaluate their respective 
data usage. 

Attackers can possibly easily infiltrate by influencing users and getting them to trust unreliable 
cloud services by using multiple accounts, generating false and multiple transactions (e.g., creation 
of several virtual machines for a shorter time duration), and providing misleading trust feedback. 
This form of manipulation creates barriers and does not allow users to recognize reliable providers. 

Attack detection includes host of challenges that include i) Consumers Dynamism wherein new 
users attach to the cloud environment and old users detach from the environment in an on-going 
basis making feedback collusion detection challenging, ii) Multiplicity of Identities refers to users 
with numerous accounts for a specific cloud service that does not allow Sybil attack detection and 
cannot be performed on account of several identities deployed to generate wrong information [7], 
iii) Attackers Behaviors prediction of malicious behaviors is tough as it can take occur during a longer 
or shorter time duration (i.e., strategic vs. occasional behaviors) [8], and iv) Consumers’ Privacy is 
where detection of attack can cause privacy breaches in udders information especially when 
sensitive information is involved. 

Many methods were used to mitigate high-rate attacks, like establishing a speed floor of network 
flow, request counting, bandwidth limitation, etc. As these attacks deploy only a bare minimum of 
resources, their adoption of Cloud Computing becomes a major challenge [9]. Cloud environment 
entails a large number of attacks that can happen at the same time and target damaging services [10]. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 3 
 

The research proposes an innovative, highly Centralized Cloud Information Accountability 
Integrity with Imperialist Competitive Key Generation Algorithm (CCIAI-ICKGA) and attack detection 
that keeps a tab on the cloud environment and the actual end user data usage therein. Every user 
maintains a set of both public and private keys dependent upon Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based 
Encryption (CP-ABE) with key generation while deploying the ICKGA and trapdoor generator. 
Thirdly, using the trapdoor generator, data integrity is maintained at the user level and cloud server 
level. Fourthly, the Dynamically Weighted Ensemble Neural Networks (DWENN) classifier is used to 
carry out attack detection. Log records structure is updated as per the above to additionally 
guarantee user data integrity as well as dependability. Framework extension is carried out to execute 
a security analysis that helps in the detection of all possible attacks. Inferences are finally drawn 
based on novel experiments, and a comprehensive and extensive assessment of the system’s 
performance is done to ensure parameters set are met. 

2 Literature Review 
Zecheng He et al [11] suggested a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) detection system based 

on the basis of machine learning methods. The system is configured to allow easy implementation on 
the Cloud provider’s side to facilitate early detection of DDoS attacks that have been acquired from 
virtual machines of the Cloud. The system provides leverage on the statistical information obtained 
from both the hypervisor and the virtual machines of the Cloud server, so that network packages may 
be prevented from being moved out to the external network. Analysis and Evaluation of nine machine 
learning algorithms is done, and on the basis of the same, the most apt is selected based on the 
detection performances. The suggested approach does not degrade performance, and its extension 
to broader DOS attacks is possible. 

Sreeram et al [12] in their study have suggested a Bio-Inspired Anomaly-based Application Layer 
DDoS attack (App-DDoS attack) detection to attain quick and early detection. The system is one that 
is a bio-influenced bat algorithm that detects the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) DDoS attacks. 
System evaluation was carried out using the dataset from the Center for Applied Internet Data 
Analysis (CAIDA). Satisfactory results were attained by the system to deliver results HTTP flooding 
attacks detection. 

Irfan et al [13] in their study have suggested a detection system of HTTP DDoS flooding attacks 
that is drawn on the basis of machine learning techniques. Four machine learning classifiers, namely, 
Naive Bayes (NBs), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Decision Trees 
(DTs), are evaluated using a local dataset. Satisfactory results were attained by the system regarding 
network traffic data that had been collected. 

In their study, Choi et al [14] have presented a DDoS attack detection employing HTTP packet 
pattern and rule engine in a Cloud Computing environment. This technique integrates HTTP GET 
flooding amongst DDoS attacks and Map Reduce processing, enabling quick attack detection to be 
achieved in a CC scenario. It guarantees system availability to ensure precise and correct detection 
of HTTP Guaranteed Entrance Token (GET) flooding. In comparison with the Snort Intrusion 
Detection System (IDS), this technique takes into account processing time and is more reliable, 
specifically in the case where congestion increases in the Cloud infrastructure. 

Aiello et al [15] resolved the issue of detection of “Slow” Denial of Service attacks with their 
approach. The issue is quite challenging in relation to the decreasing level of bandwidth that is 
generated by attacks. Hence, an innovative detection technique analyzes the key spectral 
characteristics of traffic over small time horizons. The inspection of the packet is not mandatory. 
Extrapolated data relates to actual traffic traces, extended over the Local Area Network of the 
Institute. Several threats have been analyzed and taken into consideration. Inferences clearly show 
how the methodology adopted is far more reliable and contextually relevant. 



4 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

Noor et al [16], to address the detection of reputation attacks, have suggested a methodology 
that allows consumers to make an effective identification of reliable cloud services. A credibility 
model has been introduced, which detects the misleading trust feedback acquired from collusion 
attacks and identifies Sybil attacks as well, either within a longer time duration of time or a shorter 
one. A massive set of the user’s trust feedback has been collated, which is based on practical cloud 
services and helps to assess and exhibit the efficiency and suitability of the technique suggested, and 
highlights its potential for identifying such dangerous behaviors. 

Sundareswaran et al [17] suggest a hugely decentralized information accountability framework 
deployed in the cloud that helps in tracking users' data actual usage. Specifically, the object-centered 
approach suggested facilitates enclosing the logging technique along with the data and policies of the 
users. JAR programmable capabilities are balanced to engender a dynamic and traveling object, and 
this also ensures that any attempt made to access the data of the users’ triggers authentication and 
automatic logging that is localized to the JARs. The control of the User is further fortified, and it 
additionally offers distributed auditing mechanisms. Results additionally provide the basis to carry 
out further experimental research, and they also show the competence and efficacy of the approach 
deployed. 

Garkoti et al [18] offered a detective approach in the case of healthcare organizations. The main 
aim in this approach is the detection of insider attacks so as to eliminate and prevent fake 
examinations done on the health records of the patient, and simultaneously ensure data 
accountability of data utilization. Watermarking helps in the detection of changes in the internal 
attack; however, it does not offer data usage accountability. The approach integrates the functions of 
cryptographic methods and watermarking, and an accountability framework to ensure transparency 
with regard to the usage of the patient's data. 

Ko et al [19] in their study have presented the analysis of the issues and challenges that are faced 
while attaining a trusted cloud by deploying investigative controls, and presenting the Trust Cloud 
framework, which also ensures accountability in cloud computing is attained using technical and 
policy-based techniques. Hwang and Li [20] have mentioned the trust-overlay network over different 
data centers for the implementation of the reputation system for the establishment of trust between 
service providers and data owners. Shared data objects and widely distributed software modules are 
protected by deploying data coloring and software watermarking. Data coloring and software 
marking approaches protect multi-way authentications, facilitate a single sign-on in the cloud, and 
strengthen access control for critical information in both public and private-owned clouds. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
In this study, an overview of Centralized Cloud Information Accountability Integrity with 

Imperialist Competitive Key Generation Algorithm (CCIAI-ICKGA) and attack detection that meets 
the security requirements of the cloud data owner is provided. Dynamically Weighted Ensemble 
Neural Networks (DWENN) classifier is used to execute attack detection. JAR creation is executed 
first on the data of every cloud user. Post JAR creation files conversion is executed by utilizing data 
conversion. A JAR file consists of a group of regular access control policies that clearly identify if and 
how the cloud servers and probably the stakeholders who are essentially the end users or corporates 
accessing cloud computing services are authenticated for accessing the data present in the cloud. 
Every user maintains a set of both public and private keys dependent upon CP-ABE with key 
generation [17], deploying ICKGA. Data integrity in the cloud server and user level is performed 
trapdoor generator. Encrypted log files are then decrypted, and their data integrity is also confirmed 
through the trapdoor generator. Simultaneously, attack detection is carried out during this phase of 
decryption. It may be deduced that an efficient methodology has been adopted for enhancing data 
accountability and data integrity through the utilization of JAR files, almost for the very first time. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 5 
 

These are accessible by certified stakeholders or those who own the data to access the cloud as and 
when required to facilitate auditing by deploying the log harmonizer (step 5 in Figure 1). 
Furthermore, particular error correction information is forwarded to the log harmonizer to address 
issues related to probable log file corruption. 

JAR Creation File converter using XML format  

CP-ABE with ICKGA and trapdoor 

generator  
End user Data New file in JAR  

owner 
Converted JAR file   

JAR Access  
Cloud with JAR 

Authentication request   Call Data integrity checking    

Cloud server Authentication response    

Error correcting 
Check attacker 

Attacker detection 
C-JAR   

information    
with DWENN  

No  
Yes 

If attacker   Merged log files are sending to user  

Data integrity checking   

Hash key checking   

No    
Hash key checking   If both are match Check 

authentication of 

Yes    

Receive final file from Cloud with Send to cloud user  

Check if attacker or 
Attack types   

normal user  
 

Figure 1: Overview of the CCIAI- ICKGA framework and attack detection 

3.1 Components CCIAI-ICKGA Framework 

The recommended CCIAI- ICKGA framework is not based on the platform and moreover is 
hugely decentralized, in the part that there is no requirement for any specific authentication 
mechanism or storage system. This comprises five vital elements, which include data conversion, 
logger, key generation, data integrity, log harmonizer, and attack detection. 



6 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

3.1.1 Logger 
The particular element, logger, is fundamentally the element that is attached firmly to the data 

of the customer, with the objective that when the data is accessed, it gets downloaded, and then it is 
copied every time the data is copied. With a specific instance or a data copy of the users, it seamlessly 
operates and is considered accountable for recording the access log for a specific case or its duplicate. 
The logger is sturdily combined with the data of the users, irrespective of whether it is a single data 
item or whether it is a host of data. The primary functionality of this comprises automatic logging 
access made to data items, which include the following: encoding the record that maintains a log and 
deploys the respective content owner’s public key, and every now and then forwarding them to the 
log harmonizer. 

 
3.1.2 Data conversion 

Data conversion is referred to as the transformation of one data format into another. This is a 
technical process usually executed by the software, although occasionally we employ hardware or 
human intervention in this procedure. The motive behind data conversion is to assist interoperability 
and also in order to maintain all of the data by embedding additional data.  

 
3.1.3 Choose the input file  

At this juncture, a file is taken into consideration that is illustrative of the format, and it serves 
as a template. As soon as the adapter has been developed in opposition to it, it states that a similar 
definition must work in opposition to any file of a similar format. Now and then, so frequently, there 
is sufficient context for the stylus studio to recognize the fundamental structure in addition to 
encoding up front, thus, as a result, it offers to “guess” for you, which are ultimately dependent upon 
what it knows concerning some regular file formats. 

 
3.1.4 Key Generation 

 Key generation is referred to as the process of forming keys in Ciphertext-Policy based 
Attribute-based Encryption (CP-ABE). So as to encrypt as well as decrypt any kind of data being 
encrypted/ decrypted, a key is utilized. 

 
3.1.5 Data Integrity in the User Level 

 In the introductory phase, the data is uploaded; this procedure is expected from its beginning 
condition for ‘N’ and ‘CS’, which refer to the amount of server as well as cloud storage fixed server 
correspondingly. The authentication of the data is executed from the user level, previous to 
forwarding or uploading data to the desired destination or cloud server. This is equivalent to the 
value of the data that is similar after it reaches the cloud server or when it’s in the cloud level. And, 
this is validated with the assistance of the data read protocol on the server, in addition to the user 
level. Consequently, with the intention of keeping data integrity by forwarding data into the cloud 
server, it confirms its value in user control. 

 
3.1.6 Data Integrity in Cloud Server Level 

 The only contrast is that all the procedures are executed in the cloud server location, 
employing trapdoor generation. The modifications are as mentioned in the following way. Presume 
that CSu =>CS. It is executed for identical data identification in the midst of user as well as server-
level data content. Then, the data is uploaded by CS into the server that is part of cloud computing. 

 
3.1.7 Log harmonizer  

The log harmonizer is responsible for executing the responsibility for constructing the central 
entity that authorizes the user to have admission to the log files. The master key is essentially 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 7 
 

produced by the log harmonizer because it is the authenticated element. It strictly abides by the 
decryption key for the ICKGA key pair, owing to its responsibility for the log’s decryption. Rather, the 
decryption is executed for the respective client lest the chosen path prevails amid both respective 
clients, as well as the log harmonizer is not considered to be trustworthy. At this instant, the 
harmonizer forwards the key to the client in a manner that ensures a protected key exchange. 
Conversely, execution of the decryption process is done for the respective client side when the chosen 
path is in the midst of the log harmonizer, as well as the client is not considered trustworthy. Now, 
the key to the user is forwarded by means of the harmonizer in a safe key exchange that is safe. It 
assists two auditing techniques, namely, push and pull, that are explained in the recent work [21]. 

 
3.1.8 Automated Logging Mechanism 

 The Logger component is fundamentally a nested Java JAR file that retains the data items of 
the users in conjunction with the respective log files. The suggested JAR file comprises one external 
JAR with one or multiple internal JARs.  

 
3.1.9 Logger structure  

 The authentications of the entities would be handled by the outer JAR, which is taken to be its 
key accountability that ought to have access to the information kept in the JAR file. Every internal JAR 
consists of the enciphered data along with the class files to aid in the recovery of log files and also to 
show the encompassed data in an appropriate format along with a log file for holding the entire 
enciphered item with two options, for example, pure log and access log [22]. The log records would 
be generated with the help of the logger component. Logging happens at the time of any form of 
access that is attempted at the data present in the JAR, and fresh log entries are integrated 
consecutively, in the sequence of generation LR={r_1,...,r_k}. In the latest work, a supplementary 
detail of the logger component is discussed [21]. 

 
3.1.10 JARs Availability  

In order to protect in contradiction of attacks caused on offline JARs, the CCIAI consists of a log 
harmonizer that comprises two foremost tasks: one is to manage the replicas of JARs, and the other 
is to reconstruct the logs that are corrupted. Every log harmonizer is accountable for copies of logger 
components that consist of a similar collection of data items. The harmonizer is carried out in the 
form of a JAR file. The harmonizer maintains the error correction info transmitted from its logger 
components, and the ICKGA decryption key of the users, for the purpose of having the log records 
decrypted, and also for dealing with any duplicate records that were observed from the duplicates of 
the JARs connected with the customer’s data. As a result, the data of the users is robustly merged 
along with constituents of the logger present in any data JAR file, and the respective logger gets 
replicated in coordination with the user’s data. 

3.2 CP-ABE with ICKGA 

Consider {𝑐𝑢1, 𝑐𝑢2, . . . , 𝑐𝑢𝑛} is a collection of cloud users as well as their log files LF = {lf1, . . lfn}. 
A set 𝐴2{𝑐𝑢1, 𝑐𝑢2, . . . , 𝑐𝑢𝑛} is monotone when ∀𝐵, C: if 𝐵 ∈ 𝐴 and 𝐵 ⊆ 𝐶 after that 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴 . The sets 
present in ‘A’ are referred to as the authorized sets, and the sets that are not present in A are referred 
to as the unauthorized sets. A ciphertext-policy attribute-dependent encryption [22] comprises four 
basic algorithms, that is, Setup, Encrypt, KeyGen, and Decrypt [21]. In the case of CP-ABE, the 
ciphertexts are detected with access structures in addition to the private keys that contain attributes. 
As stated by the security specification, the opponent would desire to be asked over an encryption to 
an access structure A^* and request for any private key prK so that S does not meet S^*. The 
Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) begins with a preliminary population of cloud users with 
private keys. The optimal private keys are selected and assumed to be countries that are imperialist, 



8 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

and the remaining form imperialist colonies collectively. Colonies that constitute early private keys 
of cloud users are split amongst the imperialist countries depending on their level of privacy. After 
splitting all imperialist colonies, these move closer to their respective imperialist countries. The 
ultimate privacy of all the conglomerates is dependent on the privacy of the individual private keys 
of the imperialist countries and the privacy of colonies being considered herein [23]. Once imperialist 
competition commences among conglomerates, any empire that does not have the ability to stay in 
this competition and cannot enhance its privacy of each cloud user gets ruled out from the imperialist 
contest. This leads to the alleviating of privacy of cloud user territories and results in a decrease in 
lesser privacy of empires that are considered weak. The empire that is found to be the weakest among 
empires is most likely to lose its cloud user data to a certain extent and, finally, will fall one after 
another. All of the countries will ultimately become a state, where there exists just one empire in the 
whole world, and the remaining countries become colonies of that empire [24-25]. Figure 2 depicts 
the ICA flowchart. 

 

Figure 2: Flowchart of Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) 

 
The algorithm executes with the following steps (evolution, Competition) till a termination 

condition is achieved. The derivations pertaining to the empires being created (Initialization) are 
stated as follows [25]: 

𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 = [𝑝𝑟1, … . 𝑝𝑟𝑁 ]  (1) 
𝑣𝑎𝑟



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 9 
 

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑓(𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦) = 𝑓(𝑝𝑟1, … 𝑝𝑟𝑛)  (2) 

𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑙 = 𝑁𝑝𝑜𝑝 − 𝑁𝑖𝑚𝑝  (3) 

𝐶𝑛 = max{𝑐𝑖} − 𝑐𝑛   (4) 
𝑖

𝐶
𝑝 𝑛

𝑛 = 𝑁    
𝑖𝑚𝑝 (5) 

∑ 𝐶
𝑖=1 𝑖

𝑁𝐶𝑛 = 𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 {𝑝𝑛, 𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑙}   (6) 

The Equation marked as (1) denotes a country, 𝑁𝑣𝑎𝑟 represents the magnitude of the cloud users’ 
private keys while 𝑝𝑖  represents i-th user’s privacy value with their private key, Equation shown as 
(2) indicates the country’s cost, and Equation marked (3) is essential to get the magnitude of the 
private keys of the population, aids in obtaining the imperialist’s normalized cost, in which 𝐶𝑛 
refers to the nth cost of the imperialist, and in (4) the 𝐶𝑛 refers to the privacy value pertaining to 
the nth imperialist that has been normalized, Equation numbered (5) receives each private 
keys’(imperialists) power where 𝑝𝑛  refers to the nth imperialist’s power also Equation (6) 
indicates the magnitude of the colonies that will be able to contain the imperialist. The set of 
equations for the transition of the colonies in the direction of their imperialist empire (assimilation) 
is given by [26]: 

𝑥~𝑈(0, 𝛽𝑑)  (7) 

𝜃~𝑈(−𝛾, 𝛾)  (8) 

Equation (7) stands for a colony, which moves through a distance 𝑥  in the direction of its 
imperialist, where 𝛽 denotes a number between 1 and 2 and ‘𝑑’ refers to the distance between 
privacy level between cloud users prevalent in the midst of the colony and its corresponding 
imperialist, the Equation (8) assists in searching for varied kinds of positions surrounding the 
imperialist, wherein 𝛾 is the factor taken into consideration for estimation of a big value in a global 
search of the privacy values of all the cloud users and a small value influences the local search of 
privacy values of all the current cloud users. The Equation that represents the full privacy value of a 
country is given by [27]:  

𝑇𝐶𝑛 = 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑖𝑚𝑝) + 𝜉𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛{𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑐𝑜𝑙)}  (9) 

This equation stands for the nth empire’s total privacy value (cost), and 𝜉 refers to a value between 
the numbers 0 and 1. In this regard, the smaller the value of 𝜉, the higher is the influence of the 
privacy value of the imperialist to establish the entire privacy value of the empire, and accordingly, 
the bigger the value of 𝜉, the greater is the influence over the average privacy value of the referred 
colonies pertaining to the evaluation of the empire’s total privacy value. The set of equations derived 
for the imperialist contest is as follows [28]: 

𝑁𝑇𝐶𝑛 = max{𝑇𝐶𝑖} − 𝑇𝐶𝑛  (10) 
𝑖

𝑁𝑇𝐶 𝑁
𝑝 𝑛

𝑝 = 𝑟𝑒 ∑ 𝑖𝑚𝑝 𝑝 = 1  
𝑛 𝑁  𝑤ℎ𝑒

𝑖𝑚𝑝 𝑖=1 𝑝𝑖 (11) 
∑ 𝑁𝑇𝐶

𝑖=1 𝑖



10 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

Equation (10) begins with the contest amongst the imperialists, wherein the total privacy value 
(cost), which is normalized, is estimated, and Equation (11) defines the probability involved in 
possessing a colony [27-28]. Let p(0)= sd(0), wherein s is referred to as an invariant used for ease of 
computation. p(t) includes the scores for which the walker stays at each node at time t, and this 
consists of the iterative formula 

𝑃𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝑟)𝐷𝑇𝑝(𝑡) + 𝑟𝑝(0)  (12) 

Iterating the iteration involves many steps, even now, p(t) is constant, and obtain the steady state 
𝑃𝑡. The random walk model is insensitive to the parameters. As a result, set default values for the 
parameters to be r=0, as well as s=1000. 

3.3 Trapdoor Generation 
A family of trapdoor hash [29-30] includes a pair (I, H), wherein I is referred to as a probabilistic 

polynomial-time key generation algorithm and H is called a family comprising randomized hash 
functions. I make a pair (HK, TK), in which HK is identified as a hash key and TK indicate its related 
trapdoor key. A trapdoor hash function in H is recognized as a hash function possessing a trapdoor secret. 
It is represented by hHK(m, s), in which HK is known as a public hash key for user log files, TK is called a 
private trapdoor key for user log files, m is called a message, and s is known as an auxiliary random 
number. A trapdoor hash family (I, H) accomplishes the subsequent three characteristics, namely:  

(i) Efficiency: Specified HK and any tuple (m, s), the hash value hHK(m, s) is calculated proficiently 
(that is to represent, in polynomial time).  

(ii) Trapdoor Collision: On the basis of a trapdoor one-way characteristic, we can generate collisions 
in polynomial time using the entity with the information about the trapdoor secret.  

(iii) Collision Resistance: This characteristic is considered from the view of an extra cloud user (for 
example, an entity lacking the information about the trapdoor key). With possessing no knowledge about 
the trapdoor secret, it is computation-wise impractical for another cloud user to produce any two random 
points (m1, s1) and (m2, s2) with the objective that these two points should intersect, which is to 
represent hHK(m1, s1) = hHK(m2, s2), where m1 = m2. 

In this novel technique, the trapdoor hash function in H relies on the Discrete Logarithm (DL) 
assumption, which has been defined. Choose at random a big prime q. Choose at random a safe prime p 
(which is to represent a prime p so that q = (p − 1)/2 is prime) and an element g of order q. Select a 
random element x and also calculate y = gx (mod p). The public hash key is represented as HK = (p, g, y), 
and the private trapdoor key is computed TK = x. The trapdoor hash function hHK(m, s) is expressed as 
below: 

ℎ𝐻𝐾(𝑚, 𝑠) ≝ 𝑔𝑚𝑦𝑠(𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑝)  (13) 

To exhibit that the hHK(m, s) is referred to as a trapdoor hash function under the DL supposition, 
demonstrate that the three key functions of a trapdoor hash function are met is necessary, in order for it 
to have precise efficacy, trapdoor collision, and also collision resistance. 

3.4 Attack Detection 
In the current work, the following four types of attacks are detected via the application of the Neural 

Network (NN) classifier. 

3.4.1 Disassembling Attack 
The section shows suggested system is secured by analyzing the nature and possibilities of 

attacks that are aimed at disassembling the logger JAR file and thereafter attempting to extort user-



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 11 
 

related information from the same or attempting to disrupt or damage log records. Let us consider 
the disassembling of JAR files from an attacker’s perspective, and this is advantageous as it is 
relatively easy, and on the whole, it poses a significant impact on threats to the CCIAI-ICKGA 
framework overall. As soon as the disassembling of the JAR files takes place, it enables the attacker 
to take hold of the public CP-ABE key utilized for the purpose of the log files encryption, the encrypted 
log file itself, and the *.class files. Hence, to read the log records, the attacker needs to be dependent 
on knowing about the private key or destroying the encryption. In order to compromise on the log 
files’ confidentiality, the attacker might attempt to recognize which encrypted log records pertain to 
his actions by the process of mounting a selected plaintext attack for the purpose of obtaining a few 
pairs of encrypted log records as well as simple texts. The CCIAI framework in the random oracle 
model has both types of security, which include chosen ciphertext type and chosen plaintext type. As 
a result, the attacker involved cannot perform decryption on any of the data or log files available in 
the JAR file that was disassembled. Although the particular attacker might be a certified user, he will 
have access only to the original content file, but he will not be capable of decrypting any other data, 
inclusive of the log files that are observable only by the data owner. Using the JAR files that are 
disassembled, the involved attackers will not possess the ability to analyze the policies involved in 
the access control directly, this is because the JAR files do not contain the unique source code. 
Supposing the attacker desires to deduce the policies involved in access control, the solely possible 
method is by the process of log file analysis. Nevertheless, this is very difficult to achieve since, as 
mentioned before, the log records get encrypted, and it is computationally difficult to break the 
encryption. Also, the attacker will not be able to perform modifications on the extraction of the files 
pertaining to the log from a JAR that has been disassembled. If an attacker intends to wipe out or 
corrupt any record, the supplemental checks for integrity checks present in each of the records of the 
log will not be similar during the verification period, thereby resulting in error revelation. Likewise, 
the attackers do not possess the ability to put down or include fake records in the daily files 
pertaining to the log without going unnoticed, this is because it requires signing using a legitimate 
key, as well as there will be no match for the chain of hashes. 

3.4.2 Man-in-the-Middle Attack 
This section entails details about the attacker who wishes to intercept messages or disrupt the 

authentication process to gain leverage or access from a service provider who has an authorized and 
certified access and responds to messages in the pretense of being the actual or genuine service 
provider. Two points are inherent with respect to time when any attacker can actually replay relevant 
intercepted messages. First is when the legitimate service provider completes and ends a session and 
is totally disconnected from the concerned certificate authority. Second instance is while the 
legitimate service provider has completed the session and has disconnected, however, the session is 
not in a state of total completion. In this case attacker has the opportunity to reconnect through a 
meticulously calculated process of renegotiation. In the first case, the success of the attempted attack 
is most unlikely to occur as the certificate is usually marked with a time stamp that is most likely to 
turn obsolete at the reuse attempt. In the second scenario, the attack is likely to fail as, in general, 
there is an established ban on renegotiation, specifically in the latest OpenSSL version, and 
additionally, with cryptographic checks being in place, failure is assured. 

3.4.3 DDoS attacks 
HTTP DDoS attacks are separated into two main categories: high-rate and low-rate attacks. In 

high-rate HTTP DDoS attacks, frequently known as HTTP flooding attacks, a massive number of HTTP 
requests flood the target. These attacks are simple flooding attacks that produce as many HTTP 
request packets by utilizing all the available resources of the Reflectors. Their behavior is extremely 



12 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

similar to the traditional DoS attacks, which result in a total consumption of the victim’s resources 
and/or exhaustion of the communication channel.  

3.4.4 Slow Message Body Attack (Slow POST) 
When a legitimate client intends to send data to a web server using the POST method, after the 

establishment of a TCP connection, it first sends an HTTP message header in which it states the 
amount of data to be sent. The type of field used to communicate this information to the web server 
is the Content-Length. Upon the server receiving the message header, it reads the Content-Length 
value. Subsequently, it keeps the connection alive as well as the resources running until obtaining the 
total volume of data mentioned in the Content-Length field. In its turn, the client splits the message 
body into chunks according to its network resources. 

3.4.5 Copying Attack 
The instinctive attack is when attackers copy complete JAR files. Attackers are most likely to 

presume that this would provide easy access to data present in the JAR file, and they would not be 
noticed while intruding and in doing so by the data owner. Such kind of attacks, though, are detected 
when deploying the auditing mechanism suggested in this study. Let us remind ourselves that each 
JAR file needs to transmit the log records to the harmonizer. Specifically, in relation to the push mode, 
the harmonizer sends logs to data owners intermittently. Provided the data owner is unaware of the 
inherent extra copies of its JAR files, log files from all available copies will be sent and received by the 
data owner, respectively. Considering attackers shift JAR copies to such places where the harmonizer 
is unable to connect, JAR copies in that scenario turn out to be unreachable. It happens as every JAR 
needs the redundancy information to harmonizer to be recorded regularly. Assuming the JAR is 
unable to contact the harmonizer, access to JAR content gets disabled. Hence logger component is 
more transparent than other traditional log file encryption, facilitating the data owner to identify if 
an attacker has made copies of a JAR, and it makes the offline files to become inaccessible. 

3.4.6 Dynamically Weighted Ensemble Neural Networks (DWENN) 
The methods collectively integrate outputs of different neural networks [31]. Collective output 

is a weighted average of the outputs of every network, with the ensemble weights decided in the form 
of a function of the relative error of every network decided in training [31]; the resultant network 
frequently performs better than the constituent networks. Let us take a population of networks that 
are trained over a set comprising labeled cloud users’ information of a binary attack detection 
problem into consideration. The renowned and usual method known as the general ensemble 
method (GEM) may be expressed as follows: 

𝑓𝐺𝐸𝑀 = ∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝛼𝑖𝑓𝑖(𝑥)  (14) 

Wherein 𝛼𝑖 are selected for the purpose of minimizing Mean Square Error (MSE) instead of 
attack detection ‘f’ and sum to 1. Hence error 𝜖𝑖(𝑥)of a network 𝑓𝑖 can be represented as 

𝜖𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑓(𝑥) − 𝑓(𝑥𝑖)  (15) 

Define the correlation matrix 𝐶𝑖𝑗 = 𝐸[𝜖𝑖(𝑥)𝜖𝑗(𝑥)]. Then must find weights 𝛼𝑖 that minimize 

𝑀𝑆𝐸[𝑓𝐺𝐸𝑀] = ∑𝑛 ∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑗=1 𝛼𝑖𝛼𝑗 𝐶𝑖𝑗  (16) 

It can be shown [31] that the optimal choice for the 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 13 
 

∑𝒏 𝑪−𝟏
𝒋=𝟏 𝒊𝒋

𝜶𝒊 =
∑𝒏   

𝟏 ∑𝒏
𝒌 𝑪−𝟏 (17) 

= 𝒋=𝟏 𝒌𝒋

This method yields better performance for attack detection of cloud users. The technique is 
based on making an exact estimate of C that is reliable, and considering C as being a non-singular 
inversion is easy [30]. Practically, there is an inherent correlation between errors, and hence, C rows 
are assumed to be in a state of near linear dependency such that inversion of C will result in inevitable 
round-off errors. Assuming a neural network’s output ‘y=attacker’ and its interpretation may be 
considered as the cloud user information x is present in a class, then y approaches 1=attacker, it 
becomes more certain that the instance is present in the class. When ‘y’ approaches 0=no attack, it 
becomes more possible that the cloud user information is not present in the class. Quantifying this 
idea as follows: the certainty(y) of a neural network is defined as 

1
𝑦  𝑖𝑓 𝑦 ≥

𝑐(𝑦) = { 2  (18) 
1 − 𝑦 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒

Let us consider that the certainty behaves symmetrically concerning positive and negative 
decisions; the certainty of an output of 0.1 is similar to that of an output of 0.9, however, the attack 
detection decision they are certain about is not the same. If, in place of selecting static weights 
obtained from f_i performance on cloud user information of the input space, lets the weights to adapt 
so that they are proportional to certainties of network outputs that are taken into consideration, this 
will help attain an improved performance. Hence, dynamically defining the averaged network may 
be said as under 

𝑓𝐷𝐴𝑁 = ∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑤𝑖𝑓𝑖(𝑥)  (19) 

The 𝑤𝑖  sum to 1, hence 𝑓𝐷𝐴𝑁 may be said to be a network output weighted average. The 
primary differentiating factor is the weight vector, which is recalculated every time evaluation of 
ensemble output is done, so that the best attack detection for the respective cloud user information 
that is being considered is carried out, in place of statically choosing weights that provide optimal 
detection for the cross-validation set. The sum contribution of each network may be said to be 
proportional with respect to its certainty. Selection of a value near 0.5, for cloud user information, 
can just have some negligible contribution to the respective sum; however, a very certain value of 
0.99 (or 0.01) amid several less certain values that dictate the respective sum. The technique 
resembles deploying an agreement between a set of classifiers to attain a measure of confidence in 
the attack detection. However, the confidence level (certainty) of every classifier is deployed to 
execute the final attack detection. 

4 Results and Discussion 
While executing the examination session, the test condition area must be collated, and 

subsequent analysis of the Centralized Information Accountability (CIA), CCIAI - Firefly Key 
Generation Algorithm (FKGA), CCIA-Bat Key Generation Algorithm (BKGA), and proposed CCIAI-
ICKGA system is presented by fixing up a small CC. The Open Java Development Kit (JDK) runtime 
environment allows the successful implementation of techniques. The degree at a time allows the 
overhead to occur at three motivates: at the time of authentication, then at the log record, and for the 
period of the combining of the logs. 

 



14 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

CIA CCIA-BKGA CCIAI-FKGA CCIAI-ICKGA

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Log file size(KB)

 
Figure 3: Time to generate Log Files of various Sizes vs. key generation methods 

 

Figure 3 depicts time is likely to increase to create the log file, along with the log file size. Primarily, 
the CCIAI-ICKGA system suggested, the time to yield a 100 KB file is approximately 1.52 seconds, and a 
1000 KB file is around 4.01 seconds. 

CIA CCIA-BKGA CCIAI-FKGA CCIAI-ICKGA
12

10

8

6

4

2

0
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

No. of cloud users

 
Figure 4: Storage overhead at different cloud users vs. key generation methods 

 
Figure 4 depicts the storage overhead results of four different key generation algorithms. The 

storage overhead of the proposed CCIAI-ICKGA system is around 6.2% for 200 cloud users, whereas 
other methods, such as the CIA framework, are around 10.15%, the CCIA-BKGA algorithm is around 
8.21% and the CCIAI-FKGA system is around 6.7%. Hence, it has been proved with the suggested 
approach that minimum storage space is required in comparison with the results from other 
techniques. 

 

Storage  Overhead(%) Log creation time(seconds)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 15 
 

CIA CCIA-BKGA
CCIAI-FKGA CCIAI-ICKGA

100

90

80

70

60
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

No. of cloud users

 
Figure 5: Cloud security at different cloud users vs. key generation methods 

 

Figure 5 depicts the security level of several authentication approaches. The CCIAI-ICKGA system 
suggested, and its security level is around 6.2% for 200 cloud users, whereas other methods, such as 
the CIA framework, are around 10.15%, the CCIA-BKGA algorithm is around 8.21% and the CCIAI-FKGA 
system is around 6.7%. 

CIA CCIA-BKGA

CCIIA-FKGA CCIAI-ICKGA
100

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0

Log file size(KB)
 

Figure 6: Data integrity at different cloud users vs. key generation methods 
 

Figure 6 shows the results from data integrity performed under different sizes of the log file. CCIAI-
ICKGA system data integrity level is around 93.52% for a 100 KB file, whereas other methods, such as 
the CIA framework, are around 75.63%, CCIA-BKGA algorithm is around 80.15% and CCIAI-FKGA 
system is around 91.25% for a 100 KB file. 

 

Data integrity(%) Security(%)



16 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

CIA CCIA-BKGA
CCIIA-FKGA CCIAI-ICKGA

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000

Log file size(KB)

 
Figure 7: Computation time at different cloud users vs. key generation methods 

 
Figure 7 shows the results drawn from the computation time under different sizes of the log file. 

CCIAI-ICKGA system computation time that has been suggested is around 1.85 seconds for a 100 KB 
file, whereas other methods, such as the CIA framework, are around 3.24 seconds, the CCIA-BKGA 
algorithm is around 2.69 seconds, and the CCIAI-FKGA system is around 2.22 seconds for a 100 KB file. 

 
Credibility model Object-centered approach
CCIAI-ICKGA

100

90

80

70

60
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

No. of cloud users

 
Figure 8: Attack Detection Rate at different cloud users vs. key generation methods 

 
Figure 8 shows attack detection rate results under different numbers of cloud users. The DWENN 

system suggested and its attack detection rate is around 92.56% for 200 cloud users, whereas other 
methods, such as the credibility model [16], are around 77.36%, and object object-centered approach 
is around 82.21% for 200 cloud users. 

Attack Detection rate (%) Computation time (seconds)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 17 
 

5 Conclusion 
The research work introduced suggests an innovative attack detection and Centralized Cloud 

Information Accountability Integrity with Imperialist Competitive Key Generation Algorithm (CCIAI-
ICKGA), which works automatically when logging or accessing data present in the cloud, and also 
deploys an effective auditing strategy. The CCIAI-ICKGA approach facilitates data owners to both 
audit content as well as enforce strong back-end protection as and when required. Additionally, the 
study entails an analytical analysis of attack detection and the strength of CCIAI-ICKGA architecture 
when faced with varying non-trivial attacks, which are initiated by meticulously shrewd users or 
occur because the JRE, also known as Java Running Environment, has been compromised somewhere. 
Dynamically Weighted Ensemble Neural Networks (DWENN) classifier performs the attack 
detection; it detects attacks inside JRE automatically. Most attacks are rendered ineffective with the 
DWENN classifier, as it automatically protects against the most common attacks. Log file encryption 
inhibits attackers from accessing any unauthorized information. The CCIAI-ICKGA framework that 
has been suggested inhibits attacks like the ones involving the detection of copies of users’ data, 
which is considered illegal. CCIAI-ICKGA work vastly varies from conventional logging techniques 
that encrypt data to protect log files. The research and future studies should be geared to encompass 
several policies pertinent to data and information security, as indexing policies that are applied in 
large text files, controlled use of execution commands, and a host of controls that determine 
accountability and governance. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: Niranchana Radhakrishnan; supervision and 
writing: C. Viji; review and editing: Balusamy Nachiappan. All authors reviewed the results and 
approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Jaeger PT, Lin J, Grimes JM. Cloud computing and information policy: Computing in a policy cloud?. J Inf 

Technol Polit. 2008;5(3):269-83. 
2. Pearson S, Charlesworth A. Accountability as a way forward for privacy protection in the cloud. In IEEE 

international conference on cloud computing; 2009 Dec 1, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 
2009. p. 131-144. 

3. Wei L, Zhu H, Cao Z, Dong X, Jia W, Chen Y, Vasilakos AV. Security and privacy for storage and computation 
in cloud computing. Inf Sci. 2014;258:371-86. 

4. Reed A, Rezek C, Simmonds P. 2011. Security guidance for critical areas of focus in cloud computing v3.0. 
CSA. 2011. p. 14-44.  

5. Chen D, Li X, Wang L, Khan SU, Wang J, Zeng K, Cai C. Fast and scalable multi-way analysis of massive neural 
data. IEEE Trans Comput. 2014;64(3):707-19. 

6. Khan AN, Kiah MM, Madani SA, Ali M, Khan AU, Shamshirband S. Incremental proxy re-encryption scheme 
for mobile cloud computing environment. J Supercomput. 2014;68(2):624-51. 

7. Roughgarden T. Algorithmic game theory. Commun ACM. 2010;53(7):78-86. 
8. Ren K, Wang C, Wang Q. Security challenges for the public cloud. IEEE Internet Comput. 2012;16(1):69-

73. 
9. Gonzalez N, Miers C, Redigolo F, Simplicio M, Carvalho T, Näslund M, Pourzandi M. A quantitative analysis 

of current security concerns and solutions for cloud computing. J CLOUD COMPUT-ADV S. 2012;1(1):11. 



18 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):1 
 

10. Moore D, Shannon C, Brown DJ, Voelker GM, Savage S. Inferring internet denial-of-service activity. ACM 
Trans Comput Syst. 2006;24(2):115-39. 

11. He Z, Zhang T, Lee RB. Machine learning based DDoS attack detection from source side in cloud. In 2017 
IEEE 4th International Conference on Cyber Security and Cloud Computing (CSCloud) 2017 Jun 26, New 
York, NY, USA; 2017, p. 114-120. 

12. Sreeram I, Vuppala VP. HTTP flood attack detection in application layer using machine learning metrics 
and bio inspired bat algorithm. Appl Comput Informatics. 2019;15(1):59-66. 

13. Sofi I, Mahajan A, Mansotra V. Machine learning techniques used for the detection and analysis of modern 
types of ddos attacks. Int Res J Eng Technol. 2017;4(6):1085-92. 

14. Choi J, Choi C, Ko B, Kim P. A method of DDoS attack detection using HTTP packet pattern and rule engine 
in cloud computing environment. Soft Comput. 2014;18(9):1697-703. 

15. Aiello M, Cambiaso E, Mongelli M, Papaleo G. An on-line intrusion detection approach to identify low-rate 
DoS attacks. In 2014 International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology (ICCST); 2014 Oct 13, 
Rome, Italy; 2014. p.1-6. 

16. Noor TH, Sheng QZ, Alfazi A. Reputation attacks detection for effective trust assessment among cloud 
services. In 2013 12th IEEE international conference on trust, security and privacy in computing and 
communications; 2013 Jul 16, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 2013. p. 469-476. 

17. Sundareswaran S, Squicciarini A, Lin D. Ensuring distributed accountability for data sharing in the cloud. 
IEEE Trans Dependable Secure Comput. 2012;9(4):556-68. 

18. Garkoti G, Peddoju SK, Balasubramanian R. Detection of insider attacks in cloud based e-healthcare 
environment. In 2014 International Conference on Information Technology; 2014 Dec 22, Bhubaneswar, 
India; 2014. p. 195-200. 

19. Ko RK, Jagadpramana P, Mowbray M, Pearson S, Kirchberg M, Liang Q, Lee BS. TrustCloud: A framework 
for accountability and trust in cloud computing. In 2011 IEEE World Congress on Services; 2011 Jul 4, 
Washington, DC, USA; 2011. p. 584-588. 

20. Hwang K, Li D. Trusted cloud computing with secure resources and data coloring. IEEE Internet Comput. 
2010;14(5):14-22. 

21. Punitha AA, Indumathi G. Centralized cloud information accountability with bat key generation algorithm 
(CCIA-BKGA) framework in cloud computing environment. Cluster Comput. 2019;22(2):3153-64. 

22. Waters B. Ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption: An expressive, efficient, and provably secure 
realization. In International workshop on public key cryptography; 2011 Mar 6, Berlin, Heidelberg; 2011. 
p. 53-70. 

23. Khabbazi A, Atashpaz-Gargari E, Lucas C. Imperialist competitive algorithm for minimum bit error rate 
beamforming. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput. 2009;1(1-2):125-33. 

24. Enayatifar R, Sadaei HJ, Abdullah AH, Gani A. Imperialist competitive algorithm combined with refined 
high-order weighted fuzzy time series (RHWFTS–ICA) for short term load forecasting. Energy Convers. 
Manag. 2013;76:1104-16. 

25. Shamshirband S, Amini A, Anuar NB, Kiah ML, Teh YW, Furnell S. D-FICCA: A density-based fuzzy 
imperialist competitive clustering algorithm for intrusion detection in wireless sensor networks. 
Measurement. 2014;55:212-26. 

26. Atashpaz-Gargari E, Lucas C. Imperialist competitive algorithm: an algorithm for optimization inspired by 
imperialistic competition. In 2007 IEEE congress on evolutionary computation; 2007 Sep 25,Singapore; 
2007. p. 4661-4667. 

27. Nourmohammadi A, Zandieh M, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R. An imperialist competitive algorithm for multi-
objective U-type assembly line design. J Comput Sci. 2013;4(5):393-400. 

28. Hosseini S, Al Khaled A. A survey on the imperialist competitive algorithm metaheuristic: implementation 
in engineering domain and directions for future research. Appl Soft Comput. 2014;24:1078-94. 

29. Yang FY. Improvement on a Trapdoor Hash Function.Int J Netw Secur. 2009;9(1):17-21. 
30. Harn L, Hsin WJ, Lin C. Efficient on-line/off-line signature schemes based on multiple-collision trapdoor 

hash families. Comput J. 2010;53(9):1478-84. 
31. Das R, Turkoglu I, Sengur A. Effective diagnosis of heart disease through neural networks ensembles. 

Expert Syst Appl. 2009;36(4):7675-80. 
32. Maqsood I, Khan MR, Abraham A. An ensemble of neural networks for weather forecasting. Neural Comput 

Appl. 2004;13(2):112-22.