ARTICLE 

Optimized Term Importance Framework for Automated Feature 
Derivation in Complex and High-Dimensional Big Data 

Yanglem Loijing Khomba Khuman1,* and Iyyappan Moorthi2 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, Naorem Birahari College, Khundrakpam, Manipur, India. 
2Assistant Professor, College of Information Technology, Ahlia University, Bahrain. 
*Corresponding Author: Yanglem Loijing Khomba Khuman. Email: loijingyanglem@gmail.com  

Received: 14 June 2024; Accepted: 11 September 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: In the recent trends of the Big-data, A large volume of data, mostly unstructured, is produced in a 
variety of forms such as Text, Images, Audio, and video. Making use of these data in an effective manner is a 
tedious and challenging task. Feature Extraction methods are used widely for extracting meaningful 
information from these large data sources. Data dimensionality is a critical issue when Data mining algorithms 
are applied to large data. Although many studies have been conducted in the Feature Engineering of 
unstructured data to address the dimensional complexity, most of the methods suffer from pitfalls in one or the 
other metric. This paper proposes an automated Feature Extraction method based on a weighted TF-IDF model 
using the unigram vector space method for a large text corpus. The document similarity features are calculated 
using the cosine similarity, and Document Clustering is done for grouping the similar features from the corpus 
together. Experimental analysis proves that the proposed methodology outperforms the other state-of-the-art 
embedded methods for text feature extraction. 

KEYWORDS: Big data, Feature Extraction, Dimensionality, TF-IDF model, Topic modelling, and LDA. 
  

1 Introduction 
The recent advancement in technology and storage space has made the accumulation of data 

grow exponentially with time in the past decade. The Volume, Variety, and Velocity of large data have 
drastically improved the computational abilities of the systems. The prediction of IDC says that 
unstructured data will contribute to almost 95% percent of the total data available in the next 5 years 
[1]. The characteristics that make the retrieval of useful information from unstructured data 
challenging are first it takes up different formats. Second, these are unlike traditional databases that 
have a proper schema definition. Third, these do not have a standard, and finally, it is generated from 
various sources, from basic forms to cloud sensors and IoT devices [2-6]. Owing to the reason that 
these data are too complex and of large volume, extracting useful information from these has always 
been a difficult task. Feature Engineering is a process of extracting useful information from large 
unstructured data. This information, extracted from a large corpus, is used for the data analysis. An 
efficient and correct FE method can be vital in the data analysis that contributes a lot to any business’s 
success. A handful of research has been conducted on this issue in the recent decade.  

Text form of data is the most commonly found unstructured data. These normally consisted of 
documents that had words, paragraphs, and sentences, and had a free flow without any written 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



148 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

semantics. These data are normally found to be inconsistent, noisy, and unstructured, which makes 
the process of extracting features a tedious task. Feature Engineering is perhaps known as the tool 
for creating efficient data models [7]. This is more important in the case of handling text data, as the 
task here would be to convert the freely flowing text into numeric data that a system or algorithm 
understands. 

The high-dimensionality nature of text data will end up producing many features that are least 
important and thus increase the computational cost and memory required. Feature Extraction is a 
kind of dimension reduction technique that has been proven as an effective way to handle high-
dimensional data.  

Traditionally, analysts used to create features using a manual process from domain or/business 
knowledge. Often, it is called handcrafted feature engineering, which is more complex, time-
consuming, and unbiased [8]. Feature Extraction in text data is usually performed using three 
methods. i. The filter methods are mostly used in the pre-processing phase. Here, the selection of a 
particular feature is not dependent on any one machine learning algorithm. The features are 
extracted based on the weighted scores obtained from different statistical methods for the 
correlation of the output variable. ii. Wrapper methods are those where a subset of the features is 
then used for training the model [9]. Iii. Embedded methods are those that combine the qualities of 
both (i) and (ii). These are implemented using the algorithms that have in-built methods for feature 
extraction [10]. 

 
Figure 1: Embedded Feature Extraction Model 

This research is carried out using an embedded technique, namely the Weighted-Term 
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) with a weighted vector space model for 
automated extraction of features from text documents. Further, document similarity features are 
calculated using the cosine similarity functions and comparing the pairwise document similarity 
based on the TF-IDF feature vectors. Document Clustering is done to leverage the unsupervised 
hierarchical clustering algorithm for grouping similar documents from the corpus together by 
leveraging the document similarity features extracted. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II gives the gist of available methods in a similar domain. Section III explains the feature 
extraction problem from text data. Section IV explains the proposed methodology in detail, and 
Section V discusses the experimental setup and data description. Section VI interprets the results 
obtained and the comparative analysis. Section VII concludes the paper with closing remarks and 
limitations, and scope for future research.   

2 Related Works 
Jie Chen et al (2016) introduced the adaptive weight concept in the traditional TF-IDF method. 

This was capable of determining the position weight dynamically based on the position of a particular 
word. The Vector Space model was introduced and tested in the context of Chinese-based document 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 149 
 

clustering. The results showed an increase of 12% in performance over that of the traditional TF-IDF. 
Although it performed better, this method had a severe drawback in terms of log loss and hinge losses 
[11].  

Ghayda et al (2017) proposed a weighted method that is based on the statistical prediction of 
the words’ importance in a SMS categorization issue. This method was intended to classify the SMS 
in mobile into a predefined set of classes, such as greeting, relation, sales, etc All the messages were 
converted into an unstructured text corpus. Once the pre-processing is over, the Vector model is 
prepared, and the weights are assigned for all the terms. This method was based on the categorization 
of texts, and the experiments proved a great accuracy in the classification. One of the major issues to 
be addressed is the time complexity when more weights are added to the classifiers [12]. 

Amandeep Singh et al (2018) introduced the Supervised ML approach as a combination of a 
count vector and the traditional TF-IDF, which is based on the Chi-Square for the Feature Extraction. 
The proposed method combines the different N-gram features that signify various aspects of the 
sentiment inside the text data. The proposed method performed better than other models by the use 
of a count-based TF-IDF. The SVM classifier is considered to be the better one after the experimental 
evaluation with the proposed method [13].   

Z.ZHU et al (2019) proposed a re-defined term frequency and the Inverse document frequency 
for finding the hot topics, which is based on the time distribution and attention of the users. A method 
was also put forth for generating new terms and also to combine terms that are split using the Chinese 
segmentation method. The hot news is then extracted using the hot terms, and K-means clustering is 
done for grouping the realization of the hot topics in the news. The experiments prove that the results 
obtained through the proposed refined TF-IDF are effective for finding the hot topics [14].  

YAHAV et al (2019) introduced the bias between the participants in the comments mining from 
social media data. It was found that the content which was extracted from the discourse often has 
high correlation, which results in structures having dependency in-between recordings in the study 
and thus introduces a statistical bias. Ignorance of this will lead to a non-robust analysis, which can 
drive the decision makers to a wrong conclusion. The traditional TF-IDF is adjusted here to handle 
the bias. The experiments were carried out on Facebook data that covers various domains, including 
news, finance, sports, and other entertainment [15].  

Kim, S et al (2019) proposed research on a classification technique that performs clustering of 
the research papers into a meaningful group for easy understanding, as to which research articles 
are likely to focus on similar subjects. The method proposed extracts the keywords from the abstracts 
of the paper using the LDA scheme. The K-Means clustering is performed for the classification of the 
entire papers into a group of papers that focus on similar subjects based on the TF-IDF value of all 
the papers [16]. 

Y. Li et al (2015) presented an innovative solution for the relevant feature identification. It 
identifies both the positive and the negative patterns in the free-flowing text as next-level features 
and then deploys them into lower features. Classification of the terms into suitable categories is also 
done based on the weights of the specificity and the distribution patterns. The experiments show that 
the proposed method significantly performs better than the other pattern-based methods [17]. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
The overall architecture can be viewed in four phases, namely the preprocessing phase, the 

Feature Extraction phase, the Clustering phase, and the summarization phase. Figure 2 shows the 
architecture of the proposed methodology. 



150 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

 

Figure 2: Architecture of the proposed methodology 

The proposed architecture is explained on the basis of the corpus considered for the experiment. 
The text corpus is taken from the US Departmental score card data of size 256 Mb of text content with 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 151 
 

2483 text documents. For a better understanding of the proposed methodology. A sample portion, as 
shown in Figure 3 from the corpus, is considered. 

 
Figure 3: Sample Corpus 

3.1 Preprocessing 
Data preprocessing is carried out in three methods, namely tokenization, normalization, and 

stop word removal. 

3.1.1 Tokenization 
The process of chopping the given sentence into smaller parts (tokens) is known as tokenization 

[18]. By and large, the given crude content is tokenized dependent on a lot of delimiters (for the most 
part whitespaces). Tokenization is utilized in tasks, for example, spell-checking, preparing text, 
recognizing grammatical forms, sentence discovery, document classification of reports, and so forth. 
Tokenizing utilizing Open NLP.  

Step 1 − Instantiating the respective class. 
Step 2 − Tokenize the sentences. 
Step 3 – Extract the tokens and save them in the repository that was created manually.  
We have used the tokenization apk available in the Open NLP package for the process. In the data 

that were considered for our findings. 

3.1.2 Noise Removal 
Noise removal is the next pre-processing step to be performed. The text file does have a lot of 

noise, such as punctuation, short forms, and linguistic extensions. These are eliminated by,  
• Removing the headers of the files and footers. 
• Removing the markup, such as HTML and XML. 
• Extracting interesting information from different formats, Ex. JSON or from inside the DBs. 

3.1.3 Stop-word Removal 
Once the cleaning is over, words like “is, am, are, an”, which are considered the stop words, are 

to be removed. These are done using the NLTK pre-defined stop words [19]. The pre-processing 
pipeline and implemented in the corpus, which yielded the results as depicted in Figure 4. 



152 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

 
Figure 4: Output of the pre-processed corpus 

3.2 Feature Extraction 
3.2.1 Term Frequency Count Vector using Uni-Gram model 

The VSM (“Vector Space Model”) is a simple mathematical model for the representation of 
unstructured data, particularly text, as numeric vectors in such a way that every dimension that 
belongs to the vector is viewed as a specific attribute or a feature. The Uni-gram type of model does 
the representation of all the documents into a numeric vector, where all the dimensions will be a 
definite word inside the corpus, and the value eventually is its number of occurrences in the 
document, which is denoted in a binary form ( 0 or 1 ). 

 
Figure 5: Code snippet for term-frequency vectorizing -Unigram 

The result in Figure 6 depicts that the documents have thus been converted into numeric vectors, 
where each document represents shows that the documents have been converted into numeric 
vectors such that each document is represented by one vector (row) in the above feature matrix. 

 

Figure 6: Term Frequency Count Vector 

3.2.2 Weighted TF-IDF Model 
The TF-IDF model exhibits the importance that a word has, i.e, the Term Frequency and the 

Inverse of the Document Frequency. The TF gives the total times that a given word appears in a 
document. The importance of a specific word w(i) is represented as, 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 153 
 

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑠
𝑇𝐹 (𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚) =      (1) 

∑𝑖
𝑛=0 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑠)𝑛

In the above equation, the total (terms) represents the count of occurrences of the particular 
word in the document. The term in the denominator is the sum of the count of occurrences of all the 
words in the document. IDF is the measure of the ability of the word to distinguish among the 
categories. This can be obtained by the overall count of the documents, which can be contained in the 
document, divided by the log of the actual number of documents. 

(𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑑𝑜𝑐𝑠)
𝐼𝐷𝐹 (𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚) = log + 0.01                                        (2) 

(𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑜𝑐𝑠,𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠)

Total docs is the total count of the documents, and the denominator indicates the total count of 
the documents in which the particular word is present. The IDF measure is the count of documents 
that have the words fewer and which indicates the words have excellent class discrimination. 

𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚) = 𝑇𝐹(𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚) ∗ 𝐼𝐷𝐹 (𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚)    (3) 

The weight is calculated by multiplying (1) and (2). The classical TF-IDF only considers the 
weight of the term frequency and does not take on the weights of the other features, and thus, the 
weighted TF-IDF is proposed. In any text corpus, the title and the initial paragraph play a vital role in 
determining the subject of the document. This will be helpful for the document classification and to 
restate the topic at the end of the document; therefore, these words, which at the start or end of the 
document can describe the topic more than other words of the document. Effective extraction of 
these words at the start or end of the document will have a great impact on the document's topic. If 
the context of each word is analyzed in detail, the algorithm’s time efficiency will increase 
dramatically. The position of the first occurrence of a keyword and the position of the last occurrence 
of a keyword in a document are considered. The formula for the position of the first occurrence of a 
keyword can be described as: 

𝐹.𝑃 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑)+1
𝐹. 𝑃 𝑜𝑓 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑 =  4) 

∑𝑛       (
𝑖=0𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑(𝑖)− 𝐹.𝑃 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑)

In equation (4), the meaning of FP Prior Count (word) is the number of all the words that appear 
before the position (not including this word) in the first appearance of the key 
word ∑𝒏

𝒊=𝟎 𝑪𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒕(𝒘𝒐𝒓𝒅(𝒊) is the total number of words in the document. The formula for the position 
of the last occurrence of a keyword can be described as: 

𝐿.𝑃 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑)+1
𝐿. 𝑃 𝑜𝑓 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑 =      (5) 

∑𝑛
𝑖=0𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑(𝑖)−  𝐿.𝑃 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑)

In equation (5), the meaning of LP prior Count (word) is the number of all the words that appear 
after the position (not including this word) in the last appearance of the key word. The denominator 
is the total number of words in the document. In summary, the formula for the adaptive weight of a 
key keyword’s position can be described as: 

1
𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑 =      (6) 

𝐹.𝑃 (𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑)+𝐿.𝑃 (𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑) 



154 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

Equation (6) is that the more front position of the key word which appears for the first time is, 
i.e. the value of First Position (word) smaller is, the more likely it is the word in the document title, 
abstract or first paragraph, and the more after position of the key word which appears for the last 
time is, i.e. the value of L Position (word) smaller is, the more likely it is the word in the document 
conclusion or last paragraph. Therefore, the formula for the weight of the keyword is optimized as: 

𝑇𝐹∗𝐼𝐷𝐹∗𝑃𝑊
𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑, 𝐷𝑜𝑐) =     

√∑ (𝑇𝐹∗𝐼𝐷𝐹∗𝑃𝑊)2
 (7) 

𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝜖𝐷𝑜𝑐

In equation (7), the TF is the occurrence frequency of the keyword, the IDF is the inverse 
document frequency of the keyword, and the Position Weight is the adaptive weight of the keyword’s 
position. 
 
3.2.3 Feature Vectors 

The following is the code snippet applied to the Term Frequency Count vector to obtain the 
weighted feature vectors. 

 
Figure 7: Code snippet for weighted feature vector generation 

 

Figure 8: Weighted Feature Vector representation 

Figure 8 represents the weighted Feature vector representation of the corpus considered after 
applying the relative weights of the words, first position weight, and last position weights. 
3.3 Clustering 
3.3.1 Document Similarity 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 155 
 

It is the process where the distance or the similarity is used as a metric, which is then used to 
identify how similar a certain corpus of text with any other document based on the features that are 
extracted from the documents. The cosine similarity is calculated as, 

⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ ⃗⃗  
𝑎 𝑏⃗ ∑𝑛

1 𝑎𝑖𝑏
cos 𝑥 =   =  𝑖    

⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ ⃗⃗  ⃗ ) 
| 𝑎| |𝑏⃗⃗  ⃗| ∑𝑛

1 𝑎2    (8
√ 𝑖  ∑𝑛𝑏2   

1 𝑖

where a . b  is the dot product of the given two vectors. The pairwise similarity is calculated by 
finding the document similarity between two corpora. Thus, if there are C number of documents in a given 
corpus, then the CXC matrix can be obtained such that all the rows and columns will represent the 
similarity score for a particular pair of documents. The cosine similarity is the most used, and it gives us 
the metric that represents the cosine of the angle in-between the vector notations of two documents. The 
smaller the cosine angle, the greater the similarity. Figure 9 shows the pair-wise similarity matrix of the 
corpus considered. 

 
Figure 9: Pair-wise Document Similarity matrix 

From the figure, it is understood that the documents (0,5), (1,4), (2,7), and (3,6) are falling under 
similar categories. 

 
3.3.2 Document Clustering 

The process of clustering the documents helps to leverage the unsupervised learning into data 
points as a group. The Minimum variance method is used as the linkage criterion for the minimization 
of total variance within the cluster. Hence, in each step, the pair of clusters leading to the minimum 
increase in the total variance is calculated. 

 
Figure 10: Code Snippet for the DCM 

Figure 10 shows the code snippet of the document clustering method imported for the corpus. The 
linkage matrix for the corpus obtained is as follows, and the figure shows that the features with only 



156 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

low cluster sizes are extracted and in the corpus for our consideration, the feature set extracted is as 
FS = {Performance, Conduct, Absentism, and Personal}. 

 

Figure 11: Linkage Matrix of the corpus 

4 Experimental Setup and Metrics 
The experiments are carried out under a minimum configuration. Python is used as the 

programming language, and Natural Language Processing toolkit 2.4 is used as the tool to perform 
pre-defined operations. The student text data from the US educational data hub was taken for the 
experiment that had 4605 text documents of 256Mb size. 

4.1 Performance Metrics 
The statistical parameters are used for error identification and to assess the overall performance 

of the proposed model. The various metrics used for the evaluation are as follows. Table 1 shows the 
basic parameters of evaluation. 

Table 1: Fundamental Evaluation Metric 
 

Doesn’t contain the target object or Contain the target object or 

condition condition 

Tests Negative or  True Negative False Negative 

Accepted Null Condition 

Tests Positive or Rejected Null False Positive True Positive 

Condition 

4.1.1 True Positive 
The true positive is when the final condition is marked as matching and correct, which shows 

the positive condition and denies the null hypothesis [20]. True positive is given with the symbol A. 
The true positive is given as follows: 

TP = n11 = number of such individuals    (9) 

4.1.2 True Negative 
The true negative is when the final condition is marked as non-matching and correct, which 

shows the negative condition and accepts the null hypothesis. True negative is given with the symbol 
B. The true positive is given as follows: 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 157 
 

TN = n00 = number of such individuals  (10) 

4.1.3 False Positive 
The false positive is when the final condition is marked as matching and incorrect, which shows 

the positive condition and denies the null hypothesis. A false positive is given with the symbol C. The 
false positive is given as follows: 

FP = n01 = number of such individuals  (11) 

4.1.4 False Negative 
The false negative is when the final condition is marked as non-matching and incorrect, which 

shows the negative condition and accepts the null hypothesis. A false negative is given with the 
symbol D. The false negative is given as follows: 

FN = n10 = number of such individuals  (12) 

4.1.5 Recall 
It is the test based on probability for accuracy that indicates the overall performance of the 

model in the presence of false-negative scenarios. This is calculated as, 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 ≔     (13) 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒

4.1.6 Precision 
It is the test based on probability for accuracy that indicates the overall performance of the 

model in the presence of positive scenarios. This is calculated as, 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ≔     (14) 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒

4.1.7 F1-Measure 
It is the cumulative measure to assess the overall impact that the precision and the recall have 

in a case. The F-Measure is represented between 0 and 1 or from 0 to 100 and is normally determined 
based on the case and ranges of precision and recall. It is measured by, 

(𝑅∗𝑝)
𝐹1 − 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 ≔ 2 ∗                           (15) 

𝑅+𝑃

Where R is recall, and p or P is precision. 

4.1.8 Accuracy 
The overall value for the accuracy is obtained by dividing the total number of true cases by all 

cases. 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 +  𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ≔     (16) 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 +  𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 +𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒



158 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

4.1.9 Logarithmic Loss 
Cross-entropy loss, or in other words, the log loss, is a performance measure of a given 

classification whose output is the probability between 0 and 1. The value increases as the prediction 
value deviates from the original label. In the case of a multiclass classification, the log loss is 
calculated using, 

𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 =  ∑𝑚
𝑐=1𝑦0,𝑐 log 𝑝0,𝑐    (17) 

4.1.10 Mean Squared Error 
Mean squared error is the mean of the squared difference in-between predictions and the actual 

observations. It is calculated as 

∑𝑛

 𝑀𝑆𝐸 = 𝑖=1(𝑦𝑖− 𝑦2)̂
     (18) 

𝑛

4.2 Results and Discussion 
The results obtained through various experiments are tabulated and explained in the following 

section. The results obtained are compared with those of other state-of-the-art models such as TF-
IDF (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency), Glove (Global Vectors for words 
representation), W2V (Word2vec), VSM (Vector Space Model), and BOW (Bag of Words). 

Table 2: Comparative Analysis of Number of Features Extracted, Entropy, and MV 

Method Evaluation Measures 

 No Features Extracted Entropy % Minimum variance % 

TF-IDF 51 56 57 

GLove 62 76 74 

W2V 74 71 62 

VSM 82 74 70 

BOW 95 64 81 

WTF-IDF 36 39 52 

 
Figure 12: Comparative analysis of Number of Features, Entropy, and Minimum Variance 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 159 
 

Table 2 shows the comparative analysis of the number of features extracted from the same 
documents, their entropy, and the minimum variance value obtained with that of the other models. 
It is observed from the table that the weighted TF-IDF model produces the less no of features when 
compared to other models. This is because the proposed method concentrates more accurately on 
the relative weights and thus leaves the redundant and unimportant features, unlike others, and it is 
evident from the low entropy and Minimum variance scores. Figure 12 depicts the same in a graphical 
manner. 

Table 3 brings the comparative results of the most used performance metrics, namely Precision, 
Recall F-Measure. It is seen from the table that the proposed method has high precision and recall, 
and thus proves that the proposed method produces highly accurate results (high precision) and also 
returns a majority of positive results (high recall). 

Table 3: Comparative analysis of precision, Recall, and F-score 

Method Performance Metrics 

 Precision Recall F-Measure 

TF-IDF 0.89 0.81 0.84 

GLove 0.81 0.76 0.72 

W2V 0.76 0.71 0.69 

VSM 0.79 0.74 0.70 

BOW 0.68 0.64 0.59 

WTF-IDF 0.94 0.96 0.98 

 

Figure 13: Comparison of Precision, Recall, and F-Measure 

Table 4 gives the comparative results of the various models in terms of accuracy. It is seen that 
the proposed model has the highest accuracy of 94%. The same is depicted in Figure 14 as a graphical 
form. 



160 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

Table 4: Comparative results of accuracy 

Methods Accuracy 

TF-IDF 0.89 

GLove 0.81 

W2V 0.76 

VSM 0.79 

BOW 0.68 

WTF-IDF 0.94 

 

 
Figure 14: Comparison of Accuracy 

Table 5: Comparison of Losses 

Method Performance Measures 

 Logarithmic Loss Mean Squared Error 

TF-IDF 0.26 0.21 

GLove 0.41 0.36 

W2V 0.37 0.51 

VSM 0.59 0.44 

BOW 0.61 0.64 

WTF-IDF 0.14 0.11 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 161 
 

 

Figure 15: Comparison of Losses 

Table 5 depicts the comparative results of the losses, namely the log loss and MSE. The same is 
represented in graphical form in Figure 15. It is obvious that the proposed methodology outperforms 
the other methods by having minimum losses. Ten performance metrics were chosen for the analysis 
of the results and the proposed methodology. 

5 Conclusion 
The process of Feature Extraction is used for the extraction of useful information from large 

unstructured data. The accumulation of data is happening at a very rapid rate because of 
technological advancements and modern storage facilities. Effective information extraction from 
these raw and big unstructured data is always tedious and challenging. Feature engineering is the 
best-known solution for reducing the dimensions of the Big-Data to be analyzed. Even though a 
handful of research studies have already been conducted in the domain, there are a few gaps that still 
exist. This paper proposes an automated Feature Extraction method based on the TF-IDF model using 
Skip-Gram from a text corpus. Further, document similarity features are calculated using the cosine 
similarity, and Document Clustering is done for grouping the similar features from the corpus 
together. Experimental analysis proves that the proposed methodology outperforms the other state-
of-the-art embedded methods for text feature extraction. The research still has certain limitations, 
such as the sparsity in the features that are extracted, and also improvements are planned to be 
implemented so as to bring down the dimensionality so as to decrease the algorithm complexity and 
time complexity as well. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 



162 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):10 
 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: Yanglem Loijing Khomba; supervision and 
writing—review and editing: Khuman Iyyappan Moorthi. All authors reviewed the results and 
approved the final version of the manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Gantz J, Reinsel D. The digital universe in 2020: Big data, bigger digital shadows, and biggest growth in the 

far east. IDC iView: IDC Analyze the future. 2012;2007(2012):1-6. 
2. Wang Y, Kung L, Byrd TA. Big data analytics: Understanding its capabilities and potential benefits for 

healthcare organizations. Technol Forecast Soc Change. 2018;126:3-13. 
3. Lomotey RK, Deters R. Topics and terms mining in unstructured data stores. In 2013 IEEE 16th 

international conference on computational science and engineering; 2013 Dec 3, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
2013. p. 854-861. 

4. Lomotey RK, Deters R. RSenter: terms mining tool from unstructured data sources. Int J Bu Process Integr 
Manag. 2013;6(4):298-311. 

5. Scheffer T, Decomain C, Wrobel S. Mining the web with active hidden Markov models. In Proceedings 2001 
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining; 2001 Nov 29, San Jose, CA, USA; 2001. p. 645-646. 

6. Lomotey RK, Jamal S, Deters R. SOPHRA: a mobile web services hosting infrastructure in mHealth. In 2012 
IEEE first international conference on mobile services; 2012 Jun 24, Honolulu, HI, USA; 2012. p. 88-95. 

7. Ma Q, Tanaka K. Context-sensitive complementary information retrieval for text stream. In International 
Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications; 2005 Aug 22, Berlin Heidelberg; 2005. p. 471-
481. 

8. Ren X, Zhou Y, Huang Z, Sun J, Yang X, Chen K. A novel text structure feature extractor for Chinese scene 
text detection and recognition. IEEE Access. 2017;5:3193-204. 

9. Ren Y, Li D. Fast and Robust Wrapper Method for $ N $-gram Feature Template Induction in Structured 
Prediction. IEEE Access. 2017;5:19897-908. 

10. Jiang L, Zhang L, Li C, Wu J. A correlation-based feature weighting filter for naive Bayes. IEEE Trans Knowl 
Data Eng. 2018;31(2):201-13. 

11. Chen J, Chen C, Liang Y. Optimized TF-IDF algorithm with the adaptive weight of position of word. In 2016 
2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Industrial Engineering (AIIE 2016); 2016 Nov, 
2016. p. 114-117. 

12. Al-Talib GA, Hassan HS. A study on analysis of SMS classification using TF-IDF Weighting. Int J Commun 
Netw Inf Secur. 2013;1(5):189-94. 

13. Singh A, Kumar D. Improved Feature Selection Forclassification Of Sentimental Reviews Using N-Gram 
Machine Learning Approach. Glob j eng sci res. 2018;5(7),278-288. 

14. Zhu Z, Liang J, Li D, Yu H, Liu G. Hot topic detection based on a refined TF-IDF algorithm. IEEE access. 
2019;7:26996-7007. 

15. Yahav I, Shehory O, Schwartz D. Comments mining with TF-IDF: the inherent bias and its removal. IEEE 
Trans Knowl Data Eng. 2018;31(3):437-50. 

16. Kim SW, Gil JM. Research paper classification systems based on TF-IDF and LDA schemes. Hum-centric 
Comput Inf Sci. 2019;9(1):30. 

17. Li Y, Algarni A, Albathan M, Shen Y, Bijaksana MA. Relevance feature discovery for text mining. IEEE Trans 
Knowl Data Eng. 2014;27(6):1656-69. 

18. Nayak AS, Kanive AP, Chandavekar N, Balasubramani R. Survey on pre-processing techniques for text 
mining. Int J Eng Model. 2016;5(6):16875-9. 

19. Salloum SA, Al-Emran M, Monem AA, Shaalan K. Using text mining techniques for extracting information 
from research articles. In Intelligent natural language processing: Trends and Applications; 2017 Nov 18, 
2017. p. 373-397. 

20. Yang X, Lyu T, Lee CY, Bian J, Hogan WR, Wu Y. A study of deep learning methods for de-identification of 
clinical notes at cross institute settings. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics 
(ICHI); 2019 Jun 10, Xi'an, China; 2019. p. 1-3.