ARTICLE 

Privacy-Preserving Framework for Safeguarding Healthcare Data with 
Embedded Authentication Across Federated Cloud Platforms 

S. Sivakumar1,* and T. Karthikeyan2 

1Assistant Professor, PG Department of Computer Science, Government Arts College, Udumalpet, India. 
2Department of Information Technology, University of Technology and Applied Sciences - Salalah, Thumrait Rd Thumrayt 
Street – OM 211, Sultanate of Oman. 
*Corresponding Author: S. Sivakumar. Email: drsivacsphd@gmail.com  

Received: 20 June 2024; Accepted: 09 September 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: Cloud Computing (CC) technology, because of its distributed environment, possesses more 
complicated reliability issues and privacy preservation issues of its outsourced data. The proposed design 
influences cloud infrastructures to give cost competitiveness, fast exploitation, scalability, and flexibility to 
have room for unstable workloads. The research system could be utilized to safeguard diverse medical health 
care records. Privacy-protecting storage framework presents a compressive sensing method in a multi-cloud 
design. The major motivation of this work is to introduce a new secure system for Medical Healthcare records. 
The proposed Secure Medical Healthcare Content Protection System (SMCPS) consists of two major steps: (i) 
Hybrid Key Generation (HKG) and (ii) storage management. In the initial step of the work, key values are 
created for medical healthcare records by using two encryption techniques, such as Advanced Encoding 
Standard (AES) cryptography and Message Digest (MD5) algorithm for safe multiparty computation. This 
proposed Hybrid Key Generation (HKG) algorithm is different from the usual key generation algorithm, since 
the proposed HKG algorithm adds the key values of AES and MD5. A new key value is created from these two 
algorithms, thus increasing the security level of the system. The HKG algorithm creates dynamic and 
representative keys of medical healthcare records; it is computationally resourceful to calculate and contrast, 
in addition, it needs a small storage. In the second step of the work, a Compressive Sensing (CS) based 
framework for storage management of medical healthcare records was developed. The distributed matching 
engine achieves greater adaptability, and it is created to work among different healthcare records gathered 
from the UCI machine learning vault. The applicability is further examined for the applicability of sparse coding-
based frameworks, including a variety of medical healthcare records, which influences the ability of the Multi 
Cloud Computing (MCC) environment. The experimentation work is performed by using the Miscellaneous 
database for watermark pattern, and any medical healthcare records are taken as input in the MCC 
environment results prove that safe watermark recognition in the CS domain is possible for medical healthcare 
records.  

KEYWORDS: Cloud Computing (CC), Secure Watermark Detection, Secure Multiparty Computation, Privacy 
Preserving, Compressive Sensing (CS), Cryptography Algorithms. 

1 Introduction 
Cloud Computing (CC) is considered to be an Information Technology (IT) structural design for 

ventures of future generation, as it consists of its extensive list of extraordinary benefits in IT records 
[1]: on-demand self-service, transfer of risk, rapid resource flexibility, location self-governing 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



28 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

resource pooling, present network access, and usage-based pricing [2]. By utilizing information 
technology, CC has become the nature of businesses with insightful entailments as a troublesome 
technique. One basic facet of this Model shifting has the basic facet of data centralization or 
outsourcing to the Cloud. From the standpoint of users, comprising individuals and IT enterprises, 
storage of data in distant means to the cloud provides advantages in an adaptable, on-demand way: 
despite the trouble in storage management, avoidance of resource expenses on hardware, and 
general data access along with site independence, software, and human resources maintenance, and 
so on [3]. 

In the meantime, social networks and the internet have attained an enormous growth, which 
makes it extremely easy for users to gather a huge volume of data on medical health care from varied 
sources without pointing out the copyright information of that data. Simultaneously, CC transforms 
these benefits more alluring than yet, as it carries novel and tough security threats well in the 
direction of outsourced data of users. Time to time exposing of instances of outages and security 
breaches occur in striking cloud services [4]. Cloud Service Provider (CSP) provides a variety of 
inspirations as a secondary to perform faithless laying the direction of the cloud users, which 
concerns their outsourced data status. By removal of data, CSP may regain storage as an instance for 
economic reasons which is not often used, or still conceal data loss events in order to preserve a 
reputation [5]. In brief, though outsourcing data to the cloud for long-term significant storage is 
inexpensively attractive, it does not provide any assurance instantly on data accessibility and 
integrity. In case this difficulty is not addressed appropriately, it might obstruct the triumph of cloud 
architecture.  

For resolving this issue, proposed work uses the methodology called AES cryptography [6] and 
Message Digest (MD5) algorithm [7] which facilitates watermark pattern that owner wants to share 
the data devoid of dripping data of local copy and radical decreasing of communication consequently 
and computational overhead as contrasted for clear-cut data sharing among the users of the cloud. 
In addition, the cloud user might desire to gain the benefit of the storage in the cloud, and 
simultaneously, work with copyright owners for watermark recognition whilst maintaining the self-
gathered medical healthcare data as private. The watermark pattern owners are in require of 
maintaining their watermark patterns as private for the particular duration of watermark 
recognition. An authorized cloud providing storage services as well wishes to take part in recognition 
of watermark initiated by the users, or kick off watermark recognition devoid of taking part in the 
users, for ensuring whether the uploaded medical healthcare data is copyright protected. Encrypted 
medical healthcare data provides an additional advantage of storing data and enables encrypted 
domain recognition of the watermark in the cloud, so that the encrypted data could be reprocessed 
if the image data holder is required to work with other watermark owners for safe watermark 
recognition at a later time. Additionally, the proposed work provides a Compressive Sensing (CS) 
based watermark recognition, which influences a safe MCC environment. 

2 Literature Review 
Kim et al [8] show an open evaluation convention for educational media information outsourced 

to the distributed storage. By making use of irregular esteems and also a homomorphic hash work, 
the exhibited convention ensures information protection for the cloud, notwithstanding the Third-
Party Auditor (TPA). In addition, it is sheltered, contrary to losing an attack and a temper attack. 
Furthermore, the presented protocol is capable of aiding entirely dynamic auditing. Security and 
performance investigation outcomes prove that the presented method is safe whilst assuring the 
least additional computation costs. The foremost concern is how to guard the private data of the 
image whilst facilitating image computation. In order to deal with this basic confrontation, we should 
learn the privacy prerequisites in outsourcing Scalar Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 29 
 

computation and need to present SecSIFT, which is a high-performance privacy-preserving SIFT 
feature recognition system. One of the general methods in preceding private image computation 
involves enciphering the private image in a public key-based homomorphic technique, which would 
facilitate the real processing techniques as intended for the plaintext domain to be carried out over 
the ciphertext domain. The system is not restricted by the competence restrictions of the 
homomorphic encryption method in the challenge of these works. Qin et al [9] presented a novel 
system that could share the computation processes of SIFT to a self-regulating group, supportive 
cloud servers, and it remains as the outsourced computation processes as simple as possible in order 
to avoid the utilization of a homomorphic encryption scheme. Thus, it enables the implementation of 
realistic computation with communication complexity. Comparison between SecSIFT and original 
SIFT on image benchmarks occurs which whilst preserving the privacy in a competent manner in this 
experimentation. 

Voloshynovskiy et al [10] present the multimedia content privacy-preserving detection for a 
cloud-based Bag-of-Feature (BoF) framework. They systematically model utilization of geometric 
information, which could be a shared secret and drawn from a tradeoff among the ability of detection, 
computational load, and privacy. In addition, a recommendation of a descriptor ambiguity technique 
is performed that presents ambiguity to the server with the real interest of data users. Zhang et al 
[11] guarded the private data; the BGV encryption technique is utilized by the presented model to 
encipher the private data, which applies cloud servers to carry out the high-order back-propagation 
method competently on encrypted data for training of an in-depth computation model. In addition, 
the better accuracy of the presented method of the sigmoid function as a polynomial function helps 
the safe computation of the activation function with the encryption of BGV. The BGV encryption 
method includes simple encryption operations as well as the decryption operations that are carried 
out by the client, whilst the computation tasks are entirely carried out on the cloud. Outcomes of 
experimentation prove that our method is enhanced roughly by 2.5 times in the training competence, 
which is contrasted with the deep conventional computation model, which is devoid of exposing 
private data by utilizing cloud computing, comprising ten nodes. Most significantly, the presented 
model is greatly scalable by means of applying more cloud servers, which is mainly appropriate for 
big data. 

Kang et al [12] presented a structure, simultaneously to examine the applicability of the previous 
Compressive Sensing (CS)-based on multimedia compression, and is firmly compressive multimedia 
“trans-detecting" techniques which rely upon effective coding to solidly appropriate compressive 
detection of interactive media information over a cloud-aware situation. Besides, they also inspect 
the utilization of past scanty coding-based structures for various sight and sound applications by 
utilizing the well-designed capacity of a media cloud. To think about the numerous basic confronts 
for multimedia cloud computing in purpose, security, and network/device heterogeneities, for 
instance, which examine the applications of sparse coding methods and CS in multimedia 
applications and delivery. Likewise, build a fused cloud-mindful structure for protection, saving 
mixed media applications by methods for inadequate coding. The above-stated techniques are used 
to simplify a single cloud computing environment, and storage management issues are resolved in 
some of the works only. How the data is protected by utilizing algorithms in the MCC environment is 
discussed in this way. 

Alqahtani and Sant [13] presented solution would consider the benefits of multi-clouds, data 
cryptography, and data compression to protect the distributed data; by dividing the data into 
sections, enciphering the sections, compressing the sections, sharing out the sections by means of 
multi-clouds whilst maintaining one section on the mobile device memory that would secure taking 
out the data when the shared out segments are phished. Liu et al [14] propose a competent and 
several domains’ crossways Privacy-preserving Skyline Computation structure, which is known as 



30 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

EPSC. Safer calculation of a skyline outcome from various service providers in the EPSC framework 
offers the client improved services. Meanwhile, the least privacy disclosure would be extracted from 
one service provider to another service provider for the extraction of privacy disclosure for the 
duration of skyline computation. In Particular, for controlling the privacy of service provider 
disclosure and approximate attainment of real-time skyline processing as well as transmission, 
present an Efficient Secure Vector Comparison (ESVC) protocol for building EPSC that is completely 
dependent upon new methods: Fast Secure Permutation Protocol (FSPP) as well as Fast Secure 
Integer Comparison (FSIC) protocol. Computation of skyline outcome is allowed by both the 
protocols synergistically in a privacy-preserving manner. A thorough security examination can attain 
multi-domain skyline computation as proved by the EPSC framework with devoid of disclosing it to 
everyone that the susceptible information. Performance assessments, in addition to widespread 
simulations, also show the EPSC's effectiveness in the words of giving skyline computation and 
transmission whilst which decreases the privacy disclosure of crosswise diverse domains. Fast 
Secure Integer Comparison Protocol, as well as Fast Secure Permutation Protocol, have been 
developed. The skyline set is calculated in a privacy-preserving and competent manner by means of 
widespread simulation. 

The issue of the present work is that even though outsourcing healthcare data is inexpensively 
attractive to the multi-cloud for long-standing significant storage as it will not instantly provide any 
assurance on data accessibility and integrity. In case this difficulty is not appropriately addressed, 
this might obstruct the cloud architecture achievement. To solve this problem, the Secure Medical 
Healthcare Content Protection System (SMCPS) is being proposed for the large-scale medical 
healthcare records. The advantage of this SMPCS system is that it can be applied easily to a multi-
cloud environment and is more secure for medical healthcare records. By adding the CS framework, 
the size of the original file is reduced, which reduces the storage space and decreases the time 
complexity of storage. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
In this work, a new Secure Medical Healthcare Content Protection System (SMCPS) is proposed 

for large-scale medical healthcare records. This SMCPS framework uses cloud foundations to give 
cost viability, rapid organization, versatility, higher security, and adaptability to contain fluctuating 
workloads. This SMCPS system consists of two major steps: (i) Hybrid Key Generation (HKG) and (ii) 
storage management.  

In order to increase the security of the cloud, the initial step of the work encrypt the cloud 
medical healthcare records by using the Hybrid Key Generation (HKG) algorithm, and the encrypted 
key values are stored in the data owner phase. This proposed Hybrid Key Generation (HKG) 
algorithm is different from the usual key generation algorithm, since the proposed HKG algorithm 
adds the key values of AES and MD5. A new key value is created from these two algorithms, thus 
increasing the security level of the system. In the second step of the work, a Compressive Sensing 
(CS) based framework for storage management of medical healthcare records was developed. The 
distributed matching engine attains more scalability as well, and it is developed to among diverse 
healthcare records that are being collected from the UCI machine learning repository. 
Experimentation work was performed by using the Signal and Image Processing Institute (SIPI) 
database for the watermark pattern, and any medical healthcare records were taken as input in the 
MCC environment. Results demonstrated that the safe watermark recognition in the CS domain is 
possible for medical healthcare records. 

 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 31 
 

 

Data owner X Encryption of 
Health care text 

healthcare records 
Compression of records 

 records  
using Hybrid Key 

Data owner Y using CS framework  
Generation (HKG) 

 

Data owner Z Secure storage in multi-

cloud  

Secured key  Watermark pattern  

Decrypted healthcare records  

 

Distribution to multiple users   
Figure 1: Secure Medical Healthcare Content Protection System (SMCPS) 

 

Figure 2: The workflow of operations  

Figure 2 demonstrates the workflow of operations. It illustrates how the medical healthcare 
records could interact and keep informed of the multi-cloud status; and at wherein stage the 
healthcare records on-site storage and healthcare records need to be accomplished. 



32 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

3.1 Multi-clouds model 
As stated above, this presented SMCPS technique is based on the multi-clouds conception; with 

the intention that, there are an amount of a variety of free clouds would be used to construct the 
multi-clouds model. According to the service-based model, the developers would develop a service, 
which would work more similarly to a third party among the users and the clouds, and that could be 
illustrated in Figure 3. Here, the developed service (mediator) allocates resources among the user 
and the clouds. 

 

 

Cloud owner 

 

 
 

 

 
 

Figure 3: Multi-cloud service-based architecture 

3.2 Data Splitting  
In the data splitting, we divide the healthcare data file into segments is most significant for 

various reasons: 
i. Sharing out over the multi-clouds 
ii. Evadecloud maximum-size file issue 
Additionally, dividing the healthcare records would improve the use of the offered bandwidth and 
enable load balancing. In addition, it would enable the encrypt/decryption processes by decreasing 
the size of the computed files. Officially, the health care records division enhances the processing 
throughout, by letting the pipeline and parallel processes that would decrease the operational cost 
as well as the consumed time. 

3.3 Encrypt/Decrypt 
To enhance the offered security and assure the integrity of the healthcare records, the 

presented method would consist of encryption methods. Utilizing Hybrid Key Generation (HKG) 
would improve the protection of the developed API level. As a consequence of diversity in medical 
healthcare records abilities and the user's security needs, there are a number of cryptography 
techniques that would help to facilitate the user selecting the appropriate method, and key length as 
well. HKG is introduced in this work, which combines the procedure of data encryption methods such 
as Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) and MD5 for encrypting healthcare records [15]. 

 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 33 
 

3.3.1 Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)  
Advanced Encryption Standard, simply AES, is used to enhance encryption performance. On the 

other hand, AES simply lets a 128-bit healthcare record length, which could be split into four 
fundamental operation blocks. Such blocks work on an array of bytes and are prearranged as a 4×4 
matrix, which is known be the state. For complete encryption, data has been sent through Nr rounds 
as (Nr = 10, 12, 14). These rounds have been directed by means of subsequent transformations: 
(i) Bytesub transformation: It is a type of non-linear byte substitution, using a substitution table, 
namely s-box, which has been built via multiplicative inverse and the affine transformation. 
(ii) Shiftrows transformation: It is one of the easy byte transpositions, bytes in the final three rows 
of the state are as clockwork shift; the offset of left shift could change from one to three bytes. 
(iii) Mixcolumns transformation: It is similar to matrix multiplication of the columns of states. Each 
column vector has been multiplied by a preset matrix. It should be noted that bytes are treated as 
polynomials that are willingly than the numbers. The transformation could be determined by 
following matrix multiplication on a state. 

′
02 03 01 01 𝑠 𝑠′ ′

0,0 𝑠0,1 𝑠0,2 𝑠0,3  0,0 𝑠0,1 𝑠′
0,2 𝑠0,3 

01 02 03 01 𝑠1,0 𝑠1,1 𝑠1,2 𝑠1,3  𝑠
′ ′
1,0 𝑠1,1 𝑠′ ′

1,2 𝑠1,3      
[ ] [
01 01 02 03 𝑠 𝑠 𝑠 ] =   

2,0 2,1 2,2 𝑠2,3  𝑠′ ′
2,0 𝑠 𝑠′ ′   

2,1 2,2 𝑠2,3 (1) 
03 01 01 02 𝑠3,0 𝑠3,1 𝑠3,2 𝑠  

3,3 [𝑠′ ′ 𝑠′
3,0 𝑠 𝑠′

3,1 3,2 3,3]

𝑠′
0,𝑗 = (2. 𝑠0,𝑗)⨁(3. 𝑠1,𝑗)⨁𝑠2,𝑗⨁𝑠3,𝑗    (2) 

𝑠′
1,𝑗 = 𝑠0,𝑗⨁(2. 𝑠1,𝑗)⨁(3. 𝑠2,𝑗)⨁𝑠3,𝑗   (3) 

𝑠′
2,𝑗 = 𝑠0,𝑗⨁𝑠1,𝑗⨁(2. 𝑠2,𝑗)⨁(3. 𝑠3,𝑗)    (4) 

𝑠′
3,𝑗 = (3. 𝑠0,𝑗)⨁𝑠1,𝑗⨁𝑠2,𝑗⨁(2. 𝑠3,𝑗)     (5) 

Where • represents multiplication over a finite field. If the label and these, namely A and the 
A−1, in respectively labeled and label state, which is before the mix columns operation, such as S, and 
also after S’. 

𝐴𝑆 = 𝑆′       (6) 

Therefore 

𝐴−1𝑆′ = 𝐴−1𝐴𝑆 = 𝑆   (7) 

(iv) Addroundkey transformation: It is an easy XOR between the working state and the roundkey. 

Algorithm 1. Key expansion (byte Key(16), word w(44)) 
{ 
  Word Temp 
  For(𝑖 = 0; 𝑖 < 4; 𝑖 + +) 
      For(𝑖 = 0; 𝑖 < 44; 𝑖 + +) 

𝑤[𝑖] = (𝑘𝑒𝑦[4 ∗ 𝑖], 𝑘𝑒𝑦[4 ∗ 𝑖 + 1], 𝑘𝑒𝑦[4 ∗ 𝑖 + 2], 𝑘𝑒𝑦[4 ∗ 𝑖 + 3]); 
        { 



34 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

          Temp=w[i-1]; 
          If(i  mod 4=0)  

𝑖
           Temp=Sub word (Rotword(temp)) ⨁𝑅 [ ]; 

4

            w[i]=w[1-4] ⨁temp; 
         } 
   } 

The key has been copied as the first four words of an expanded key. The remainder of the 
expanded key has been filled in four words at a time. Each add word w[i] could depend on an 
immediately preceding word, namely w[i − 1], and word four positions back as w[i − 4]. In four cases, 
three cases are using simple XOR. For a word where the position in the w array is a multiple of 4, it is 
a more complex function. 
3.3.2 MD5 message-digest 

MD5 could process variable-length healthcare records in a fixed-length output of 128 bits. The 
input healthcare record has been broken up into chunks of 512-bit blocks, and the healthcare record 
has been padded so that its own length is divisible by 512. The first single bit, namely 1, has been 
appended to the end of healthcare records. This has been followed by many zeros that are required 
for bringing the length of healthcare records up to 64 bits, which is less than a multiple of 512. The 
remaining bits have been filled along 64 bits, which denotes the length of an original healthcare 
record as a modulo 264. 
3.3.3 HKG 

The AES algorithm is used to provide security of healthcare data through encryption and the 
decryption process. The MD5 helps generate an additional secret key for the data owner and the 
cloud user for communication.  

Health care records 

AES algorithm  MD5 algorithm  

Generate key 𝑘1 Generate key 𝑘2 

Hybrid key 𝐻𝑘 by XOR operation  

Encrypt data  

Hybrid key 
Cloud user 

𝐻𝑘& cipher text 
Decrypt the data  

Healthcare records received by cloud users    
Figure 4: HKG algorithm architecture diagram 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 35 
 

In this proposed HKG algorithm, by using bit-wise XOR operation, the key values of AES and 
MD5 algorithms are combined, and a new key value is created. This XOR operation increases the 
security of the cloud user's healthcare records. This operation is performed by means of after 
healthcare records are converted into ciphertext. In this proposed approach, first choose healthcare 
records, then key values k1 & k2 are created from MD5, and AES. This would be used to perform the 
XOR operation. Then, finding out the encryption and a decryption key could exponent and that has 
been used for an encryption and also a decryption process. At the sender side, an encryption is being 
done by an encryption algorithm. When encryption starts, the XOR operation might be performed 
between the k1 & k2. A new key value has been created and then named Hk. After the operation secret 
message has been sent via a medium. At the receiver side secret key and secret message that given 
by the cloud user to receive the original health care records. Then decrypt the original file using the 
hybrid key, ciphertext text and get the original healthcare records sent by the sender. The 
diagrammatic representation of the proposed HKG algorithm is shown in the figure. 

3.4 CS transformation  
There are mainly three parties in the presented structure, the Data Holders, simply DH of the 

possibly called watermarked images, Watermark Owners called WO, and Cloud, namely CLD, as 
depicted in Figure 5. The structure as well needs a Certificate Authority, and simply as CA for bringing 
out public keys as well as CS matrix keys to assure named parties of the structure. For DH, namely media 
agencies, while it gathers a huge amount of medical healthcare data from the Internet and also stores 
an encrypted version in CLD, it also needs to ensure that those medical healthcare records can be edited 
and also republished officially. Watermark Owners, or shortly as WOs, provide that providers who can 
share the watermarked content, which means watermark embedding has been carried out by means of 
WO, previous to the content being published. WOs at all times desire to make out if their contents are 
lawfully utilized and republished. 

  
Figure 5: Architecture of the proposed CS framework 



36 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

Primarily, the CA wants to bring out the CS matrix matches to DH. The CS matrix also comprises 
seeds and a random function utilized to produce the Gaussian CS matrix. Utilize CA to bring out a 
random function to ensure the randomness of the produced Gaussian CS matrix. The CA, as well, wants 
to bring out an AES and MD5 pair to DH and DH’s public key for WO. Generally, DH as well contains a 
diverse private compressive sensing matrix (derived from the seed) for every image. DH changes the 
image DCT coefficients to the compressive sensing domain, as well as considers CLD that contains CS 
domain data for storage. In case watermark recognition with the WO is needed, we want CLD to contain 
the watermark in an identical CS domain that has been attained by running a safe multiparty protocol. 
Compressive Sensing (CS) Framework: The Restricted Isometry Property, called RIP, is a needed 
condition particularly for perfect reconstruction in compressive sensing theory. Before presenting 
compressive sensing theory, first of all, RIP has to be introduced. 

Restricted Isometry Property (RIP): A vector called 𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝑛 is a k-sparse and if |{ 𝑗 ∶  |𝑥𝑗| >  0}| ≤
 𝑘. A matrix called 𝛷 ∈ 𝑅𝑚×𝑛 is called having RIP of an order k and the level 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1) (which is 
equivalently, and (k, δ)-RIP) if, 

2 2 2
(1 − 𝛿)||𝑥|| ≤ ||Φ𝑥|| ≤ (1 + 𝛿)||𝑥||    (8) 

2 2 2

For all the k-sparse 𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝑛 . The restricted isometry constant called 𝛿𝑘  has been defined as the 
smallest value of δ for above inequality holds.  
The CS theory [16] asserts that while data can be represented using a small number of the nonzero 
coefficients, they can be perfectly recovered after being transformed by a limited number of incoherent, 
non-adaptive linear measurements. Suppose, data called 𝑑 ∈ ℝ𝑛  is a k-sparse vector, which means 
that only k elements are out of n elements of the dare nonzero element, and transformed for 𝑑 ∈ ℝ𝑚, 
whereas 𝑚 < 𝑛 𝑥 =  𝜙𝑚×𝑛 𝑑 . If 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 might satisfy RIP, it has been shown by solving the 
optimization problem: 

𝑚𝑖𝑛||𝑑|| 𝑠. 𝑡. 𝑥 = 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 𝑑   (9) 
1

Equation (9) is found as equivalent for finding out the sparsest solution called d to 𝑥 =  𝜙𝑚×𝑛 𝑑 
providing m ≥Cklog(n/k), whereas C is small constant. Eq. (9) can present an L1 minimization problem 
that can be solved through Orthogonal Matching Pursuit and simply OMP algorithms. It is also shown, 
there are such many ways to construct a matrix, namely 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 Which meets RIP property, for instance, 
if entries of the matrix called 𝜙𝑚×𝑛. Those have been generated from a Gaussian distribution with a 
zero mean and a variance such as 1/m, 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 is RIP matrix along an overwhelming probability. In this 
particular framework, the CS matrix was generated from a Gaussian distribution. Let, the X = {xi}, Y = 
{yi} be a two n-dimensional cloud user data vectors and the 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 be an m ×n-dimensional random 
matrix. Each particular entry of a 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 is found as independent and identically chosen from the 
Gaussian distribution with the mean zero and the variance 1/m. In further, the P = 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 X; and the R 
= 𝜙𝑚×𝑛 Y. Then, 

𝐸[𝑋𝑇𝑌 − 𝑃𝑇𝑅] = 0   (10) 

𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝑋𝑇𝑌 − 𝑃𝑇 1
𝑅] = (∑𝑛

𝑖 1 𝑥2 ∑𝑛 𝑦2 𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑦

𝑚 = 𝑖 𝑖=1 𝑖 + (∑ 𝑥𝑖 𝑖)
2)   (11) 

In Zeng and Liu’s work [17], the most excellent watermark recognition performance has been attained 
by means of utilizing the selective DCT coefficients for the recognition. On the other hand, DH in the 
framework may not have information that are regarding the criteria for the selection procedure. Still, 
if we are presuming that DH could contain such type of information, DH can want to know DCT channels 
that are being used for the watermark recognition. Embedding process as 𝑑′

𝑖 = 𝑑𝑖  +  𝑤𝑖 , whereas 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 37 
 

𝑤𝑖 is an inserted watermark signal that is derived from the watermark pattern {𝑦𝑖 }. In the detection 
process, test cloud user data {𝑥𝑖 } has correlated along with the watermark pattern {𝑦𝑖 }. Detection of 
watermarks has been accomplished through hypothesis testing. 
𝐻0: 𝑥𝑖 = 𝑑𝑖 + 𝑛𝑖 without watermark 
𝐻0: 𝑥𝑖 = 𝑑𝑖 + 𝑛𝑖 + 𝑤𝑖 with watermark 
Where ni is noise. Normalized correlating detector can output a test statistic called q, which has been 
compared with a threshold called T for identification, if the test image could contain claimed 
watermarks: 

∑𝑛 𝑀 ∗
𝑞 = 𝑖=1 𝑧𝑖 𝑧 √𝑛

= 𝑖    (12) 
𝑉𝑧 ∗

𝑖 √𝑛 𝑉𝑧𝑖

Where as 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑖𝑦𝑖 , namely n is the size of the feature set called {zi}. 𝑀𝑧  and the 𝑉2
𝑧  are the 

𝑖 𝑖

sample mean and the sample variance of 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑧𝑖  that given as follows: 

∑𝑛 ∑𝑛

𝑀 𝑖= 𝑧
𝑧 = 1 𝑖 𝑖=1(𝑧𝑖−𝑀𝑧 )2

, 𝑉2 = 𝑖  
𝑖 𝑛 𝑧   (13) 

𝑖 𝑛−1

Finally, under the hypothesis called H0, for the large n, q has approximately a normal distribution, 
such as q ∼ N(0, 1). Under the H1, q ∼ N(μ, 1), whereas μ > 0. 

4 Experimental Results 
In the experimental work assessed the presented SMCPS system was assessed utilizing some 

standard images, such as Peppers, Baboon, and Lena, with 512×512 images. These standard 
watermark pattern images were collected from the standard benchmark Signal and Image Processing 
Institute (SIPI) database [18]. The SIPI database comprises 44 images, 16 colors, and a total of 28 
monochromes. The sizes are 14 256x256, 26 512x512, and 4 1024x1024. For an individual image, 
the first click on an image name, which is left of every line below for shows a 200x200 pixel preview 
of the image. The 24-bit color-based images have been reduced to 8 bits/pixel in order to previewing 
purposes. The proposed algorithms are implemented by using a JAVA environment with an SQL 
database and an implemented Glowfish server. 

Baboon: Courtesy of Signal and the Image Processing Institute at the University of Southern 
California is illustrated in Figure 6. 

 
Figure 6: Baboon Samples 

Lena: Courtesy of a Signal and an Image Processing Institute at the University of Southern 
California, and shown in Figure 7. 



38 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

 
Figure 7: Lena input image 

Peppers: Courtesy of the Signal and Image Processing Institute at the University of Southern 
California is shown in Figure 8. 

 
Figure 8: Pepper’s input image 

Select the one wherein the watermark pattern used for the watermark recognition is openly 
produced, particularly from a Normal distribution such as N (0, 1). The CS matrix size is exceedingly 
huge, only if that transfers a 512×512 image for the vector to CS transformation. To replace specifically 
for cutting an image into pieces, and each piece possesses 64 8×8 DCT blocks.  

 
Figure 9: Patient attributes information 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 39 
 

The Selective DCT coefficients of every piece could form a vector and also as changed to the CS 
domain at a similar as CS rate in however, it utilizes the diversity of CS matrices. In the watermark 
pattern, the healthcare dataset samples were collected from the benchmark UCI machine learning 
repository. Many healthcare patients’ records were collected from this repository. In addition, the 
research work on healthcare patients’ records is encrypted by adding attributes of the patients. The 
sample attributes of patients are shown in Figure 9. In order to secure patient attributes and the 
patient healthcare records; the files are encrypted using HKG and shown in Figure 10. 

 

Figure 10: Patient attributes information with key values 

 
Figure 11: Watermark patterns 



40 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

In order to provide more security from unauthorized users, the proposed model encrypts 
records and adds watermarks by using the standard watermark images, are shown in Figure 11. Once 
the watermark patterns are selected, the files are embedded in the image, and it is shown in Figure 12. 

 
Figure 12: Watermark image with the healthcare data  

4.1 Compression methods comparison 
Macro-scale compression, zero-knowledge watermark protocol, CS framework, and the proposed 

SMCPS framework are compared in this evaluation. CS based privacy preserving framework, as the 
DCT coefficients aren’t entirely sparse, in which CS restoration would produce distortion for the 
reformed image, particularly when while CS rate is small. CS reformation error has been studied in a 
lot of particular works. Currently, MCPS with CS reformation experimentation outcomes, while each 
specific AC component has been modified to the CS domain. The results are measured in terms of 
Peak Signal to Noise Ratio, which is shortly represented as PSNR, the Mean Squared Error, simply 
MSE, and the Structural Similarity Index called SSIM. 
4.2 Mean Squared Error (MSE)   

PSNR is as most in easily defined through Mean Squared Error, called MSE. Given a noise-free 
m×n monochrome image such as I and that noisy approximation called K, MSE is also defined by 

1
𝑀𝑆𝐸 = ∑𝑚−1 ∑𝑛−1

𝑖=0 𝑗=0 [𝐼(𝑖, 𝑗) − 𝐾(𝑖, 𝑗)]2  (14) 
𝑚𝑛

4.3 Peak Signal to Noise Ratio(PSNR)  
Peak Signal to Noise Ratio is found as the most commonly used measure quality of the 

reconstruction of lossy compression codecs. The signal is original data, and the noise is an error 
introduced by means of compression. While comparing compression codecs, the PSNR is an 
approximation for human perception of the reconstruction quality. Although by higher PSNR 
generally indicates reconstruction is found as higher in quality, in some cases it might not. One has 
to be extremely careful with the range of validity of this particular metric; it is only conclusively valid 
while it is utilized for comparing results from the same codec and the same content. The PSNR that 
represented in dB, has been defined as: 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 41 
 

𝑀𝐴𝑋2
𝐼 𝑀𝐴𝑋

𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 10 log10 ( ) = 20 log10 ( 𝐼)  (15) 
𝑀𝑆𝐸 √𝑀𝑆𝐸

𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 10 log10(𝑀𝐴𝑋𝐼) − 10 log10(𝑀𝑆𝐸)   (16) 

4.4 Structural Similarity (SSIM) index 
SSIM is for measuring similarity between the two images. SSIM index is a full reference metric; 

namely, in other words, the measurement or the prediction of an image quality is purely based on an 
initial uncompressed or a distortion-free image as by reference. The SSIM index has been calculated 
on the various windows of the image. The measurement between two windows, called x and y, in a 
common size called N×N, is 

(2𝜇𝑥𝜇𝑦+𝑐1)(2𝜎𝑥𝑦+𝑐2)
𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑀(𝑥, 𝑦) =   (17) 

(𝜇2
𝑥+𝜇2

𝑦+𝑐1)(𝜎2+𝜎2  
𝑥 𝑦+𝑐2)

 
Figure 13: Comparison of the PSNR vs. other algorithms 

 
The experimentation results prove that the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio of the proposed SMCPS 

framework is about 40.5 dB, whereas the other compression methods, such as Macro-scale 
compression, zero-knowledge watermark protocol, and CS framework, produce PSNR results of 
32.89 dB, 34.15 dB, and 36.95 dB, while the CS rate is 1.0, as depicted in Figure 13 (See table 2). It 
concludes the proposed SMCPS framework, which performs better when compared to the other 
compression methods. 

Table 1: PSNR vs. other algorithms 

PSNR(dB) 

CS rate Zero-knowledge Macro-scale compression CS Framework SMCPS-CS 

0.2 30.12 31.52 32.5 34.8 

0.4 30.87 32.15 33.69 35.51 

0.6 31.05 32.98 34.1 36.89 

0.8 32.46 33.5 35.25 38 

1 32.89 34.15 36.95 40.5 

 



42 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

 
Figure 14: MSE Comparison vs. other algorithms 

 

Figure 14 shows the MSE performance comparison results of Macro-scale compression, zero-
knowledge watermark protocol, CS framework, and proposed SMCPS framework. However, the 
proposed SMCPS framework produces MSE results of 0.271, whereas the other compression 
methods, such as Macro-scale compression, zero-knowledge watermark protocol, and CS framework, 
produce MSE results of 0.41, 0.38 dB, and 0.328, at a CS rate is 1.0 (See table 2). It concludes that the 
proposed SMCPS framework produces a lower MSE value when compared to other compression 
methods. 

Table 2: MSE vs. other algorithms 

MSE 

CS rate Zero-knowledge Macro-scale compression CS Framework SMCPS-CS 

0.2 0.35 0.32 0.28 0.22 

0.4 0.37 0.33 0.3 0.24 

0.6 0.38 0.35 0.31 0.25 

0.8 0.389 0.365 0.32 0.268 

1 0.41 0.38 0.328 0.271 

 
Figure 15 shows the SSIM performance comparison results of Macro-scale compression, zero-

knowledge watermark protocol, CS framework, and proposed SMCPS framework. From the results, 
the proposed SMCPS framework produces SSIM results of 0.8581, whereas the other compression 
methods, such as Macro-scale compression, zero-knowledge watermark protocol, and CS framework, 
produce MSE results of 0.76, 0.7825, and 0.823, at a CS rate is 1.0 (See table 3). It concludes that the 
proposed SMCPS framework produces a lower MSE value when compared to other compression 
methods. 
 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 43 
 

 
Figure 15: SSIM Comparison vs. other algorithms 

Table 3: SSIM vs. other algorithms 

SSIM 

CS rate Zero-knowledge Macro-scale compression CS Framework SMCPS-CS 

0.2 0.72 0.76 0.78 0.82 

0.4 0.723 0.768 0.791 0.828 

0.6 0.746 0.77 0.798 0.834 

0.8 0.753 0.78 0.814 0.8478 

1 0.76 0.7825 0.823 0.8581 

 

 
Figure 16: Comparison of the communication costs vs. other algorithms 

In Figure 16 prove that as the amount of healthcare samples for safe watermark recognition 
increases, the proposed SMCPS is compared with existing methods in terms of communication cost 
(See table 4). SMCPS structure contains much superior scalability as well as superior competence 
while carrying out safe watermark identification on a huge amount of healthcare samples, although 
the SMCPS framework is superior to other algorithms. 

 



44 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

Table 4: Communication costs vs. other algorithms 

Communication costs(MB) 

No. of samples Zero-knowledge Macro-scale compression CS Framework SMCPS-CS 
 

20 356 325 265 218 

40 512 484 452 381 

60 598 541 498 412 

80 742 665 569 518 

100 847 765 625 543 

 
Figure 17: Comparison of the security level vs. other algorithms 

Figure 17 proves that as the amount of healthcare samples for safe watermark detection 
enhances, the presented Secure Multimedia Content Protection System (SMCPS), existing methods in 
words of security (See table 5). The SMCPS framework provides higher security while carrying out 
safe watermark identification on a large number of healthcare samples. 

Table 5: Security vs. other algorithms 

Security(%) 

No. of samples Zero-knowledge Macro-scale compression CS Framework SMCPS-CS 
 

20 80.26 85.69 88.13 90.58 

40 81.58 86.15 89.18 91.81 

60 82.25 86.54 89.93 92.57 

80 83.02 87.41 90.42 93.78 

100 83.58 88.17 91.23 94.46 

 

5 Conclusion 
In this review, a new Secure Medical Healthcare Content Protection System (SMCPS) is 

proposed for a Multi-Cloud Computing (MCC) environment. This SMCPS uses two different 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 45 
 

encryption algorithms, such as AES and MD5 encryption, which create a new key by multiplying key 
1 and key 2, which increases the security and efficiency. The proposed SMCPS system possesses two 
major steps, namely, at an initial step, the key values are created for healthcare records by encryption 
algorithms for secure computation, and the second step is a Compressive Sensing (CS) based 
framework that is proposed for data storage management in the MCC environment. CS framework 
reduces the size of the original medical or healthcare content for image acquisition. From the results, 
it is concluded that the proposed SMCPS framework produces MSE results of 0.271, whereas the 
other compression methods, such as Macro-scale compression, zero-knowledge watermark protocol, 
and CS framework, produce MSE results of 0.41, 0.38 dB, and 0.328, at a CS rate is 1.0. In future work, 
the proposed SMCPS system work is to be enhanced by including other encryption methods, which 
might assist in increasing the security level. Finally, the work intends to expand the MCC to the 
proposed SMCPS system to their individual cloud storage. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: S. Sivakumar; supervision and writing—review 
and editing: T. Karthikeyan. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the 
manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Senyo PK, Addae E, Boateng R. Cloud computing research: A review of research themes, frameworks, 

methods, and future research directions. Int J Inf Manag. 2018;38(1):128-39. 
2. Buyya R, Srirama SN, Casale G, Calheiros R, Simmhan Y, Varghese B, Gelenbe E, Javadi B, Vaquero LM, Netto 

MA, Toosi AN. A manifesto for future generation cloud computing: Research directions for the next decade. 
ACM Comput Surv. 2018;51(5):1-38. 

3. Ullah A, Nawi NM, Ouhame S. Recent advancement in VM task allocation system for cloud computing: 
review from 2015 to 2021. Artif Intell Rev. 2022;55(3):2529-73. 

4. Suryateja PS. Threats and vulnerabilities of cloud computing: a review. Int J Comput Sci Eng. 
2018;6(3):297-302. 

5. Dawood M, Tu S, Xiao C, Alasmary H, Waqas M, Rehman SU. Cyberattacks and security of cloud computing: 
a complete guideline. Symmetry. 2023;15(11):1981. 

6. Mohammad HM, Abdullah AA. Enhancement process of AES: a lightweight cryptography algorithm-AES 
for constrained devices. TELKOMNIKA. 2022;20(3):551-60. 

7. Kasgar AK, Dhariwal MK, Tantubay N, Malviya H. A review paper of message digest 5 (MD5). Int J Mod Eng 
Manag Res. 2013;1(4):29-35. 

8. Kim D, Kwon H, Hahn C, Hur J. Privacy-preserving public auditing for educational multimedia data in cloud 
computing. Multimed Tools Appl. 2016;75(21):13077-91. 

9. Qin Z, Yan J, Ren K, Chen CW, Wang C. SecSIFT: Secure image SIFT feature extraction in cloud computing. 
ACM Trans Multimed Comput Commun Appl. 2016;12(4s):1-24. 

10. Voloshynovskiy S, Diephuis M, Holotyak T. Privacy preserving multimedia content identification for cloud-
based bag-of-feature architectures. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia & Expo 
Workshops (ICMEW) 2015 Jun 29, Turin, Italy, 2015, p. 1-6. 

11. Zhang Q, Yang LT, Chen Z. Privacy preserving deep computation model on cloud for big data feature 
learning. IEEE Trans Comput. 2015;65(5):1351-62. 

12. Kang LW, Muchtar K, Wei JD, Lin CY, Chen DY, Yeh CH. Privacy-preserving multimedia cloud computing 
via compressive sensing and sparse representation. In 2012 International Conference on Information 
Security and Intelligent Control 2012 Aug 14, Yunlin, Taiwan, 2012, p. 246-249. 



46 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):3 
 

13. Alqahtani HS, Sant P. A multi-cloud approach for secure data storage on smart device. In 2016 sixth 
international conference on digital information and communication technology and its applications 
(DICTAP) 2016 Jul 21, Konya, Turkey, 2016, p. 63-69. 

14. Liu X, Choo KK, Deng RH, Yang Y, Zhang Y. PUSC: Privacy-preserving user-centric skyline computation over 
multiple encrypted domains. In 2018 17th IEEE International conference on trust, security and privacy in 
computing and communications/12th IEEE International conference on big data science and engineering 
(TrustCom/BigDataSE) 2018 Aug 1, New York, NY, USA, 2018, p. 958-963. 

15. Kumar R, Mahajan G. A novel framework for secure file transmission using modified AES and MD5 
algorithms. Int J Inf Comput Secur. 2015;7(2-4):91-112. 

16. Qaisar S, Bilal RM, Iqbal W, Naureen M, Lee S. Compressive sensing: From theory to applications, a survey. 
J Commn Net. 2013;15(5):443-56. 

17. Zeng W, Liu B. A statistical watermark detection technique without using original images for resolving 
rightful ownerships of digital images. IEEE Trans Image Process. 1999;8(11):1534-48. 

18. Yousif SF, Abboud AJ, Radhi HY. Robust image encryption with scanning technology, the El-Gamal 
algorithm and chaos theory. IEEE Access. 2020;8:155184-209.