ARTICLE 

Enhanced Correlation Mapping Framework Employing Hybrid 
Evolutionary Strategy for Drug–Disease Association Discovery Across 
Diverse Biomedical Sources   

Thimmiaraja J1,*, J. Macklin Abraham Navamani2 and Siva Shankar Ramasamy3 

1Assistant Professor, Department of IT, Dr. Mahalingam College of Engineering and Technology, India. 
2Associate Professor, Division of Digital Sciences, Karunya School of Sciences, Arts & Media, Karunya Institute of 
Technology and Sciences, (Deemed to be University), India. 
3International College of Digital Innovation, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 50200. 
*Corresponding Author: Thimmiaraja J. Email: thimmia@gmail.com  

Received: 01 July 2024; Accepted: 15 October 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignant tumors with a high rate of 
morbidity and mortality. Predicting new drug indications in drug development for HCC analysis becomes a 
major and difficult task. Few algorithms have been devoted to drug prediction for a specific disease. This work 
provides an integrative framework to predict novel drugs and diseases for HCC based on a multi-source 
Imperialist Competitive Algorithm-based random walk (PDDH-MICARW). Firstly, based on gene expression 
and disease interaction network, construct a gene-gene weighted interaction network (GWIN). Then, 
dimensionality reduction is performed by using the Improved Regularized Linear Discriminant Analysis 
(IRLDA). Then, based on a multi-source random walk in GWIN, build a drug-drug similarity network and, 
disease-drug similarity network. Finally, based on the known drugs for HCC, score all drugs in the drug-drug 
similarity network, disease-drug bipartite graph network. This network provides more information on these 
interactions, compared to the component or parent networks. The robustness of PDDH-MICARW predictions 
is measured for HCC. It concludes that the proposed work can effectively identify new drug indications. The 
robustness of our predictions, their overlap with those reported in the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database 
(CTD) and literature, and their enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway 
demonstrate proposed approach can effectively identify new drug indications. 

KEYWORDS: Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC), dimensionality reduction, Improved Regularized Linear 
Discriminant Analysis (IRLDA), gene-Gene Weighted Interaction Network (GWIN), and Multi-source 
Imperialist Competitive Algorithm-based Random Walk (MICARW). 

1 Introduction 
Nature presented itself as a potential drug resource for scientists, enabling serendipitous 

discoveries for centuries. The venture of drug discovery started with random screening of crude 
plants such as reserpine, lavender, and opium, and later created the drug industry, which is one of 
the most advanced industries in our society [1]. As a part of this industry, the drug discovery process 
has enormous investments in infrastructure. Research and development (R&D) require huge 
amounts of time and money. Further, translation of the promising molecule to an approved drug has 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



48 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 
 

major problems, including high failure rates and withdrawal risks by reason of safety or efficacy 
problems [2]. 

Drug repositioning (DR), which is an auxiliary process to conventional drug discovery, has 
gained attention from both academia and pharmaceutical companies. Drug repositioning, also named 
“drug repurposing or drug recycling,” is a promising approach to overcome hurdles in discovering 
and developing new drugs via the identification of new therapeutic applications of known drugs. 
Repurposed drug candidates have established formulations and manufacturing methods, extensive 
pharmacokinetic properties, known adverse effects, clinical trial information, and post-marketing 
surveillance safety data, which make a beeline for the drug development with less chance of failure 
[3]. With the generation of large-scale genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data, computational 
prediction of new drug indications has become one of the leading ways to investigate drug-disease 
treatment. Several computational methods have been introduced to solve this problem. Those 
methods are discussed in detail in the review section. 

In the review work few methods have been introduced to solve the drug prediction for a specific 
disease. This is also one reason why the prediction accuracy of many results is not high enough. 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common cancer and the third leading cause of 
cancer-related death worldwide, and its incidence is increasing [4]. Despite the widespread use of 
surveillance programs in at-risk populations, more than half of HCC cases are diagnosed late, and 
curative therapies such as surgical resection, transplantation, or radiofrequency ablation are possible 
in fewer than 30% of the patients. Most HCC patients have unresectable disease at diagnosis [5]. The 
prognosis of patients with HCC remains poor, and life expectancy is difficult to predict. HCC 
development is often related to the presence of a chronic liver disease, which represents one of the 
most important risk factors for this neoplasia. In particular, cirrhosis, which can occur as a 
consequence of chronic viral hepatitis, excessive alcohol intake, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or 
genetic diseases (e.g., hemochromatosis), is a frequent setting for HCC onset as well as a cause of liver 
dysfunction. 

In this study, the precise drug prediction is taken as an extremely hard process. As a result, this 
research is used to find out numerous accurate drug signs for HCC. This method finds novel drugs 
and diseases for HCC based on predict novel drugs and diseases for HCC based on multi-source 
Imperialist Competitive Algorithm-based random walk (PDDH-MICARW) with several steps: at the 
start of the research, integrate gene expression data, a gene set, and a drug disease similarity network 
to construct a GWIN for HCC. Subsequently, the data dimensionality is decreased by means of utilizing 
Improved Regularized Linear Discriminant Analysis (IRLDA) to enhance the prediction accuracy. 
After that, based on GWIN, a disease-drug similarity network and a drug-drug similarity network are 
constructed. Finally, taking all the existing drugs for the treatment of HCC, all drugs in the networks 
are scored to find new appropriate drugs for HCC.  

2 Literature Review 
Li et al [6] developed a computational framework to build disease-specific drug-protein 

connectivity maps. Also integrated gene/protein and drug connectivity information based on protein 
interaction networks and literature mining, without requiring gene expression profile information 
derived from drug perturbation experiments on disease samples. To achieve overall good data 
coverage and quality, a series of statistical methods has been developed to overcome high levels of 
data noise in biological networks and literature mining results. 

Dudley et al [7] showed that computational methods for drug repositioning can be classified in 
two axes: drug-based, where discovery initiates from the chemical perspective, or disease-based, 
where discovery initiates from the clinical perspective of disease or its pathology. Newer algorithms 
for computational drug repositioning will likely span these two axes, will take advantage of newer 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 49 
 

types of molecular measurements, and will certainly play a role in reducing the global burden of 
disease. 

Jin et al [8] defined a new network component called Cancer-Signaling Bridges (CSB) and 
integrated it with a Bayesian Factor Regression Model (BFRM) to form a new hybrid method termed 
CSB-BFRM. Proof-of-concept studies were conducted in breast and prostate cancer cells and in 
promyelocytic leukemia cells. In each system, CSB-BFRM analysis could accurately predict clinical 
responses to more than 90% of drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and more 
than 75% of experimental clinical drugs that were tested. Mechanistic investigation of Off-Target 
Effects (OTE) for several high-ranking drug–dose pairs suggested repositioning opportunities for 
cancer therapy, based on the ability to enforce retinoblastoma-dependent repression of important 
E2F-dependent cell-cycle genes.  

Hurle et al [9] reviewed highlights of computational techniques for systematic analysis of 
transcriptomics, such as Connectivity Map (CMap), side effects, and genetics Genome‐Wide 
Association Study (GWAS) data to generate new hypotheses for additional indications. Also discuss 
data domains such as Electronic Health Records (EHRs) and phenotypic screening that we consider 
promising for novel computational repositioning methods. 

Ye et al [10] developed a drug-drug network that was constructed based on the similarities 
between their clinical side effects. The indications of a drug may be inferred by the enriched FDA-
approved functions of its neighbouring drugs in the network. Furthermore, the method could be 
extended to predict drugs not covered in the network. In summary, a method that is based on the 
indications enriched by network neighbors may provide new clues for drug repositioning using side 
effects. 

Wang et al [11] proposed a computational framework based on a heterogeneous network model 
and applied the approach to drug repositioning by using existing omics data about diseases, drugs, 
and drug targets. The novelty of the framework lies in the fact that the strength between a disease–
drug pair is calculated through an iterative algorithm on the heterogeneous graph that also 
incorporates drug-target information. Comprehensive experimental results show that the proposed 
approach significantly outperforms several recent approaches. Case studies further illustrate its 
practical usefulness. 

Yang et al [12] proposed a Causal Inference-Probabilistic Matrix Factorization (CI-PMF) 
approach was proposed to predict and classify drug–disease associations, and further used for drug-
repositioning predictions. In terms of drug–disease association prediction, modified causal inference 
included in CI-PMF outperformed existing causal inference with a higher AUC (area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve) score and greater precision. Overall, CI-PMF is a useful 
approach for associating drugs with complex diseases and provides potential value for drug 
repositioning. 

Jiao et al [13] provided a brief overview of recent advances in the computational drug 
repositioning for anticancer applications with a specific emphasis on the repositioning of non-cancer 
drugs by use of various computational approaches. Wang et al [14] proposed a novel 
recommendation‐based drug repositioning strategy to simultaneously determine novel drug 
indications and side effects in one integrated framework. This strategy provides a complementary 
method to medical genetics‐based drug repositioning, which reduces the occurrence of false 
positives in medical genetics‐based drug repositioning, resulting in a ranked list of new candidate 
indications and/or side effects with different confidence levels. Several new drug indications and side 
effects are reported with high prediction confidence. 

Gayvert et al [15] developed a Computational Drug Repositioning Approach for Targeting 
Oncogenic Transcription Factors (CRAFTT) approach for targeting TF activity. Dexamethasone 



50 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 
 

significantly decreased cell invasion and migration in an ERG-dependent manner. Furthermore, 
analysis of electronic medical record data indicates a protective role for dexamethasone against 
prostate cancer. Altogether, the method provides a broadly applicable strategy for identifying drugs 
that specifically modulate TF activity. 

Sun et al [16] introduced a new data fusion model based on n-cluster editing as a novel multi-
source triangulation strategy, which was further combined with semantic literature mining. The 
proposed evaluation suggests that utilizing drug–gene–disease triangulation coupled to 
sophisticated text analysis is a robust approach for identifying new drug candidates for repurposing. 

Vanhaelen et al [17] provided a comprehensive overview of the current status of in silico 
repurposing methods by establishing links between current technological trends, data availability, 
and characteristics of the algorithms used in these methods. Using the case of the computational 
repurposing of fasudil as an alternative autophagy enhancer, suggest a generic modular organization 
of a repurposing workflow. Reviewed a three-dimensional (3D) structure-based, similarity-based, 
inference-based, and Machine Learning (ML)-based methods. Finish by discussing current directions 
of research, including possibilities offered by new deep learning. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
This research is used to find out numerous accurate drug signs for HCC. This method finds novel 

drugs and diseases for HCC based on predict novel drugs and diseases for HCC based on multi-source 
Imperialist Competitive Algorithm-based random walk (PDDH-MICARW) with several steps: at the 
start of the research, integrate gene expression data, a gene set, and a drug disease similarity network 
to construct a GWIN for HCC. Afterwards, the data dimensionality is decreased by means of utilizing 
Improved Regularized Linear Discriminant Analysis (IRLDA) to enhance the prediction accuracy. 
After that, based on GWIN, a disease-drug similarity network and a drug-drug similarity network are 
constructed. Also, with the intention of evaluating and filtering the drug-drug network, disease-drug 
similarity network, use z-score and a cutoff. Finally, taking the available drugs utilized for handling 
HCC in the form of drug seeds, all drugs in the networks are scored to find new potential drugs for 
HCC. As well, segregate the drugs identified by the features of their targets and get nine more reliable 
drugs. 

3.1 Construction of Gene-Gene Weighted Interaction Network (GWIN) 
The general genes along with their associated edges in the gene network are discussed in this 

segment. For each gene pair ‘i’ and ‘j’, while there is a relationship amongst them, calculate the 
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) along with its corresponding p-value. The PCC assesses the 
edge between gene ‘i’ and ‘j’; instead, while its p-value ≥ 0.05, eliminate the edge. GWIN is represented 
as G = (V, E), wherein V and E denote the group of nodes as well as edges, respectively. 

3.2 Dimensionality reduction by using IRLDA 
In this section, describe the basic notations used in the work for dimension reduction of gene 

disease samples. Let 𝑋 =  {𝑥1, 𝑥2, . . . , 𝑥𝑛} denote n training samples (or vectors of drug disease 
samples) in a d-dimensional space having class labels Ω= {ω1, ω2,...,ωn}, where ω ∈ {1, 2,..., c} and c is 
the number of classes. The gene drug diseases dataset X can be subdivided into c subsets X1, X2, ..., Xc, 
where Xj belongs to class j and consists of nj number of samples such that 𝑛 =  ∑𝑐

𝑗=1 𝑛𝑗. The data 
1 1

subset 𝑋𝑗  ⊂  𝑋 and X1∪ X2∪···∪ Xc = X. If 𝜇𝑗  = ∑x∈ x  s t e c n r i  f X
𝑛 X  i  h  e t o d o  j and μ = ∑ ∈ x  i  

𝑛 x X  s
j

𝑗

the centroid of X, then the total scatter matrix ST, within-class scatter matrix SW, and between-class 
scatter matrix SB are defined as follows. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 51 
 

𝑆𝑇 = ∑ 𝑇
𝑥∈𝑋(𝑥 − 𝜇)(𝑥 − 𝜇)    (1) 

𝑆 𝑐 𝑇
𝑊 = ∑𝑗=1 ∑𝑥∈𝑋 (𝑥 − 𝜇𝑗)(𝑥 − 𝜇 )    (2) 

𝑗 𝑗

𝑇
𝑆𝐵 = ∑𝑐

𝑗=1 𝑛𝑗(𝜇𝑗 − 𝜇)(𝜇𝑗 − 𝜇)    (3) 

In the SSS problem, d > n, which will make scatter matrices singular. Let rt be the rank of the ST matrix. 
The eigenvector decomposition of ST can be given as 

Λ 𝑈𝑇
𝑆𝑇 = [𝑈1, 𝑈2] [ 𝑇 .

] [ 1 ) 
. 0 𝑈𝑇]   (4

2

where 𝑈 𝑡 )
1 ∈  ℝ𝑑×𝑟  corresponds to eigenvalues Λ𝑇 and 𝑈2 ∈  ℝ𝑑×(𝑑−𝑟𝑡  corresponds to the zero 

eigenvalues. The matrix 𝑈1 is the range space of 𝑆𝑇 and the matrix 𝑈2 is the null space of 𝑆𝑇 . Since 
the null space of 𝑆𝑇 does not contain any discriminant information, the dimensionality can be 
reduced from d-dimensional space to r t-dimensional space by applying Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA) [18] as a pre-processing step. The range space of ST matrix, 𝑈 𝑑×𝑟𝑡

1  ∈ ℝ , will be used 
as a transformation matrix. In the reduced-dimensional space, the scatter matrices can be computed 
by: 𝑆𝑊 ← 𝑈𝑇

1 𝑆𝑊𝑈1  and 𝑆 𝑇
𝐵  ←  𝑈1  𝑆𝐵𝑈1 . After this procedure 𝑆𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑟𝑡×𝑟𝑡  and 𝑆 𝑡×𝑟𝑡

𝐵 ∈ ℝ𝑟  are 
reduced-dimensional within-class scatter matrix and reduced-dimensional between-class scatter 
matrix, respectively. In RLDA, the regularization of the within-class scatter matrix SW is carried out 
by adding a perturbation term α to the diagonal elements of SW; i.e., 𝑆̂𝑊  =  𝑆𝑊  +  𝛼𝐼. The addition 
of α will make the within-class scatter non-singular and invertible. This would help to maximize the 
modified Fisher’s criterion. 

𝑤𝑇𝑆
𝐽(𝑤, 𝛼) = 𝐵𝑤

   (5) 
𝑤𝑇(𝑆𝑊 + 𝛼𝐼)𝑤

where w ∈ ℝ𝑟𝑡×1 is the orientation vector. To avoid any heuristic approach in the determination of 
the parameter α, we solve Eq.(5) in the following manner. Let us denote the function f = wT w 𝑆𝐵𝑤 
and a constraint function. 

g = wT(SW+αI)w−c = 0   (6) 

where c > 0 is any constant. 

3.3 Construction of drug-drug similarity network 

For each drug, obtain a set of gene targets. To construct the drug-drug similarity network to be 
conscious of the association among all of the drugs. The association between any two drugs is derived 
by calculating the correlation between their target sets. By imitating the process, which involves 
multiple random walkers [19] with Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) called MICARW wander 
on GWIN, the power of association amongst any two target sets is to be scored. Figure 1 shows the 
flowchart of the imperialist competitive algorithm. ICA starts with an initial population of drug 
information. The best correlation value between the target set (countries) is selected as imperialist 
countries, and the rest form the imperialist colonies. All colonies of the initial population are divided 
among the imperialist countries based on their weight matrix of GWIN. After dividing all the colonies 
among the imperialists, the colonies begin the movement towards their imperialist countries. The 
total weight matrix of GWIN of all the empires depends on the weight matrix of GWIN of the 
imperialist countries and the weight matrix of GWIN of their colonies. This fact is defined with the 



52 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 
 

total weight matrix of GWIN of an empire by the weight matrix of GWIN of the imperialist country 
plus a percentage of the average weight matrix of GWIN of their colonies. When the imperialist 
competition between the empires starts, any empire that cannot remain in this competition and 
cannot augment its weight matrix of GWIN will be removed from the imperialist competition. The 
imperialist competition will result in an increment in the weight matrix of GWIN of the most weight 
matrix of GWIN empires and a decrement in the weight matrix of GWIN of the weaker empires. The 
weakest empires will lose their weight matrix of GWIN partially and, ultimately, will collapse one by 
one. All countries will eventually become a state in which there is only one empire in the entire world, 
and all remaining countries are colonies of that empire. 

 
Figure 1: Flowchart of Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) 

The algorithm continues with the mentioned steps (Assimilation, Revolution, Competition) until 
a stop condition is satisfied. The equations for the formation of empires (Initialization) are the 
following: 

𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 = [𝑝1, … . 𝑝𝑁 ]   (7) 
𝑣𝑎𝑟

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑓(𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦) = 𝑓(𝑝1, … 𝑝𝑛)   (8) 

𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑙 = 𝑁𝑝𝑜𝑝 − 𝑁𝑖𝑚𝑝   (9) 

𝐶𝑛 = max{𝑐𝑖} − 𝑐𝑛   (10) 
𝑖

𝐶
𝑝 𝑛

𝑛 = 𝑁    
𝑖𝑚𝑝 (11) 

∑ 𝐶
𝑖=1 𝑖

𝑁𝐶𝑛 = 𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 {𝑝𝑛, 𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑙}   (12) 

In Equation (7), Country represents a country, Nvar is the number of drugs of interest, and pi is 
the value of i-th drug. Equation (8) represents the cost of a country, Equation (9) is necessary to obtain 
the number of colonies of the population, and used to obtain the normalized cost of each imperialist, 
where cn is the n-th imperialist’s cost, and Cn is the normalized cost of n-th imperialist, Equation (10) 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 53 
 

obtains the power of each imperialist where pn is the power of n-th imperialist and Equation (11) 
represents the number of colonies that can possess that imperialist. The equations for moving the 
colonies towards their imperialist country (assimilation) are: 

𝑥~𝑈(0, 𝛽𝑑)   (13) 

𝜃~𝑈(−𝛾, 𝛾)   (14) 

Equation (13) represents a colony that moves a distance x towards its imperialist, where β is a 
number between 1 and 2, and d represents the distance between the drug and diseases among the 
colony and its imperialist. Equation (14) helps us to search for different positions around the 
imperialist. In which γ is a parameter, where a large value estimates a global search of the weight 
matrix and a small value impacts the local search of the weight matrix. The Equation for the full 
weight matrix of an empire is as follows: 

𝑇𝐶𝑛 = 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑖𝑚𝑝) + 𝜉𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛{𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑐𝑜𝑙)}   (15) 

This equation represents the total cost of nth empire, and ξ is a number between 0 and 1. Where, 
with a small value of ξ, it has a greater influence of the imperialist weight matrix on determining the 
total weight matrix of the empire, and with a large value of ξ, it has a greater influence on the average 
weight matrix of the colonies to determine the total weight matrix of the empire. The equations for 
the imperialist competition are the following: 

𝑁𝑇𝐶𝑛 = max{𝑇𝐶𝑖} − 𝑇𝐶𝑛   (16) 
𝑖

𝑁𝑇𝐶
𝑝 𝑛 𝑁

𝑝 = 𝑁  𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 ∑ 𝑖𝑚𝑝 𝑝 = 1   
𝑛 𝑖𝑚𝑝 𝑖=1 𝑝𝑖 (17) 

∑ 𝑁𝑇𝐶
𝑖=1 𝑖

Equation (16) starts with the imperialist competition, where the normalized total cost is 
calculated, and in Equation (17), we provide the probability of possessing a colony. Let S = (sij)m×m be 
called the weight matrix of GWIN, which is also a transition matrix, where m is the number of genes. 
Let d(0)=(di(0))m×1 is called initial probabilities. Obtain Sij by allotting probabilities comparative to 
gene similarities with the neighbors of the complete genes in the target set TA and 0 otherwise. Let 
p(0)= sd(0), wherein s is called an invariant for ease of computation p(t) includes the scores that the 
walkers stay at each node at time t, and comprises the iterative formula. 

Pt+1 = (1 − r)DTp(t) + rp(0)   (18) 

By iterating the iteration many steps, even now, p(t) is constant, and obtain the steady state p(t). 
The random walk model is not sensitive to the parameters. As a result, set default values for the 
parameters as r=0, as well as s=1000. Two weighted edges are there with various directions among 
them for each drug-drug pair. The network is represented as Gdd = (Vdd, Edd), wherein  Vdd  and 
Edd are similarly nodes as well as edge sets in Gdd. 

3.4 Disease-Drug Similarity Network by using a Bipartite Graph Network 
The disease drug-associated genes interconnecting with one another suggest that they tend to 

get grouped in the same neighborhood of the interactome and form a disease module or a drug 
module, a connected subgraph that comprises the entire molecular mechanisms of a disease or a 



54 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 
 

drug. As a result, the accurate evaluation of relations among disease modules as well as drug modules 
is considered to be an important step to identify potent drug-disease associations. A bipartite graph 
[20] is called a graph of two genes X and Y wherein edges (assume undirected) are simply let from 
one node in X to one node in Y. Consider associating a weight w with each edge in the bipartite graph, 
get a weighted bipartite graph. In a projection of a bipartite graph, simply one group of genes (X or 
Y) appears with edges from one node to another, while they were associated with the same node in 
the original graph. Also, the projection comprises several weights on the edges. For example, one 
possible weighting for an edge from node x1 to x2 in a projection of the set X is called the number of 
nodes in Y that x1 and x2 are associated with each other. 

A graph is represented as 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸), wherein G is called the graph, V is known as the collection 
of vertices, and E is called the collection of edges. An edge connecting the vertices u, v ∈ V is 
represented as {u, v} ∈ E. The reality that two vertices u and v are linked would also be represented 
as u ∼ v. The number of neighbors of a node u is known as the degree of u and is signified as d(u) = 
|{v ∈ V | u ∼ v}|. 

Bipartite graphs are graphs wherein the collection of nodes (X, Y) is split into two separate sets, 
with the intention that every edge links a vertex of one partition with a vertex of the other partition. 
A bipartite graph is signified as 

𝐺 = (𝑉1, 𝑉2, 𝐸)   (19) 

Wherein  𝑉1 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑉2 are known as the two disjoint vertex sets, and E is called the collection of 
edges. A corresponding description of bipartite graphs is the graphs that do not comprise odd cycles, 
that is to say, cycles encompassing an odd number of edges. Especially, it keeps an eye on whether a 
bipartite network does not encompass triangles. Finally, in order to make the distances score 
comparable to the drug-disease relationships, the distance scores are treated as so. Firstly, transform 
all of the distances into positive by comprising the least distance score to each distance, and 
afterwards get their reciprocals. Finally, with the intention of normalizing the complete distances, 
use the maximum-minimum. As a result, the higher the distance score, the more related among drug 
and disease. Finally, for every disease-drug association, get its corresponding p-value. Eliminate the 
complete edges whose p-values are not lower than 0.01. 

4 Results and Discussion 
In this segment, the presented PDDH-MICARW, PDD-MSBARW-based drug prediction for HCC 

performance is assessed, and the performance outcomes are matched up with previous PDD with 
Multi-Source Bat Algorithm based Random Walk (PDD-MBARW), PDD with MS Simulated Annealing 
Random walker (PDD-MSSARW), PD-MRW, and PREDICT techniques. Primarily, obtain the gene set 
related to human HCC from CTD (version 2014). Afterwards, download gene expression profiles of 
HCC from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ geo/) datasets (GDS). The 
Drug Bank database combines by means of drug info with entire drug target info and Drug Bank 
database (version 4.0). In this research, we obtain the chemical–HCC associations from CTD (version 
2014). This presented technique evaluates the consequence of various network aggregation methods 
on the whole ranking performance. Give five sets of results corresponding to five various cutoff 
values, that is to say, {1.25, 2.5, 5, 10, and 15}. The scores of the top-20 drugs are normalized with a 
logarithm so as to describe the results more obviously. 

4.1 Performance analysis 
Precision is defined as the ratio of correctly found positive observations to all of the expected 

positive observations. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 55 
 

Precision = TP/TP+FP   (20) 

Sensitivity is defined as the ratio of correctly identified positive observations to the overall 
observations in the real class – yes. 

Recall = TP/TP+FN (21) 

F1 score is defined as the weighted average of Precision as well as Recall. As a result, it produces 
false positives and false negatives. 

F1 Score = 2*(Recall * Precision) / (Recall + Precision) (22) 

Accuracy is calculated in terms of positives and negatives as follows: 

Accuracy = (TP+FP)/(TP+TN+FP+FN) (23) 

Here, by using a 5-fold cross-validation method reiterated 10 times, we evaluated the PDD-
MSBARW method, existing PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, and PREDICT techniques. Table 1 represents 
the AUC and accuracy; recall averaged crosswise the Drug Bank classes with more than 20 drugs, 
using the GWIN as well as BGN networks. In Figure 2, the performance assessment results of the three 
various cutoffs of weight w values are calculated among five methods. Instead, the increased weight 
values, proposed PDDH-MICARW method provides improved precision value of  97.83% for w=15, 
when other methods such as PD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, and PREDICT methods provide precision value 
of 96.67%, 94.22% and 92.60%values respectively. The proposed technique performs superiorly 
when compared with other methods. 

Table 1: Metrics comparison with Drug Bank categories with greater than 20 drugs 

wcutoffvalues   Metrics PREDICT PD-MRW PDD-MSSARW PDD-MSBARW PDDH-MICARW 

w=5 Precision (%) 89.76 90.02 91.05 92.56 96.93 

Recall  (%) 88.70 89.91 90.10 91.34 96.93 

F-measure  (%) 89.23 89.965 90.575 91.95 96.93 

Accuracy  (%) 88.35 89.71 91.82 92.76 94.40 

w=10 Precision  (%) 91.18 93.38 95.56 96.45 96.96 

Recall  (%) 91.11 92.31 93.48 94.32 97.81 

F-measure  (%) 91.145 92.845 94.52 95.385 97.38 

Accuracy  (%) 91.25 92.49 93.53 94.65 95.20 

w=15 Precision  (%) 92.60 94.22 96.77 97.12 97.83 

Recall  (%) 94.57 95.19 96.77 97.21 97.83 

F-measure  (%) 93.585 94.705 96.77 97.165 97.83 

Accuracy  (%) 92.64 93.41 94.75 95.68 96.00 

 



56 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 
 

w=5 w=10 w=15
100
98
96
94
92
90
88
86
84

Methods  
Figure 2: Precision vs. methods (with different weight values) 

In Figure 2, the performance assessment results of the three various cutoffs of weight w values 
are calculated among five methods. Instead, the increased weight values, proposed PDDH-MICARW 
method provides improved precision value of 97.83% for w=15, when other methods such as PD-
MSSARW, PD-MRW, and PREDICT methods provide precision value of 96.67%, 94.22% and 
92.60%values respectively. The proposed technique performs superiorly when compared with other 
methods.  

w=5 w=10 w=15
100
98
96
94
92
90
88
86
84

Methods  
Figure 3: Recall vs. methods (with different weight values) 

In Figure 3, the recall assessment results of the three various cutoffs of weight w values are 
calculated among five PDDH-MICARW methods, existing PDD-MSBARW, PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, 
and PREDICT techniques are represented. Instead, the increased weight values, proposed PDDH-
MICARW technique provides a superior recall value of 97.83% for w=15, when other methods such 
as PDD-MSBARW, PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, and PREDICT techniques provide recall value of 91.21%, 
96.77%, 95.19% and 94.57% values respectively. The proposed technique performs superiorly when 
compared with other methods.  

Precision(%)
Recall(%)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 57 
 

w=5 w=10 w=15
100
98
96
94
92
90
88
86
84

Methods  
Figure 4: F-measure vs. methods (with different weight values) 

In Figure 4, the f-measure assessment results of the three various cutoffs of weight w values are 
calculated among five PDDH-MICARW methods, existing PDD-MSBARW, PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, 
and PREDICT techniques are represented. Instead, the increased weight values, proposed PDDH-
MICARW technique provides a superior f-measure value of 97.83% for w=15, when other methods 
such as PDD-MSBARW, PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, and PREDICT techniques provide f-measure value 
of 97.165%, 96.77%, 94.705% and 93.585% values respectively. The proposed technique performs 
superiorly when compared with other methods. 

w=5 w=10 w=15
98
96
94
92
90
88
86
84

Methods

 
Figure 4: Accuracy vs. methods (with different weight values) 

In Figure 5, the accuracy assessment results of the three various cutoffs of weight w values are 
calculated among five PDDH-MICARW methods, existing PDD-MSBARW, PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, 
and PREDICT techniques are represented. Instead, the increased weight values, proposed PDDH-
MICARW technique provides a superior recall value of 96.00% for w=15, when other methods such 
as PDD-MSBARW, PDD-MSSARW, PD-MRW, and PREDICT techniques provide recall value of 95.68%, 

F-measure(%)
Accuracy(%)



58 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 
 

94.75%, 93.41% and 92.64% values respectively. The proposed technique performs superiorly when 
compared with other methods. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
Drug repositioning is one of the most important methods for improving the drug discovery 

process. Most of the previous methods for drug repositioning don’t focus on a specific disease and 
tend to use a specific source of data to predict drug-disease associations. In this study, focusing on a 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC), a new PDDH-MICARW method for novel drug usage prediction is 
proposed. PDDH-MICARW consists of several major steps: Firstly, integrate gene expression data, a 
gene set, and a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network to construct a gene-gene weighted 
interaction network for HCC (GWIN). Secondly, based on GWIN, use the theory of multi-source 
random walk to construct a drug-drug similarity network. Here, “multi-source random walk” means 
a random walk starting from multiple given vertices simultaneously, i.e., the multiple starting 
vertexes corresponding to multiple sources. A novel Improved Regularized Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (IRLDA) algorithm for dimensionality reduction is presented, which raised the prediction 
accuracy. Subsequently, a drug-drug similarity network is constructed, a disease-drug similarity 
network. Lastly, dependent upon the known drugs for HCC, score each drug in the drug-drug 
similarity network, disease-drug bipartite graph network. The proposed PDDH-MICARW method 
integrates heterogeneous data and knowledge, and uses the theory of multi-source random walk to 
obtain the similarity between each pair of drugs. In the simulation experiment, firstly, filter predicted 
drugs using the features of drug targets. The experimentation outcomes prove that the proposed 
method achieved greater performance outcomes in regard to accuracy, prediction, recall, and F-
measure, matched up with existing techniques. Plan to broaden the applicability of our method by 
incorporating disease-specific symptoms and side effects of drugs are focused in future work. This is 
likely to be of significance in the near future, with the accumulation of clinical phenotypes and drug 
side effects, in conjunction with patient-specific genetic information. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: Thimmiaraja J; supervision and writing: J. 
Macklin Abraham Navamani; review and editing: Siva Shankar Ramasamy. All authors reviewed the 
results and approved the final version of the manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 

1. Mukherjee PK, Rai S, Kumar V, Mukherjee K, Hylands PJ, Hider RC. Plants of Indian origin in drug discovery. 
Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2007;2(5):633-57. 

2. Sinha S, Vohora D. Drug discovery and development: An overview. Pharm Med Transl Clin Res. 2018:19-
32. 

3. Deotarse PP, Jain AS, Baile MB, Kolhe NS, Kulkarni AA. Drug repositioning: a review. Int J Pharma Res Rev. 
2015;4:51-8. 

4. Nevola R, Acierno C, Sasso FC, Marrone A, Buffardi F, Adinolfi LE, Rinaldi L. Hepatocellular carcinoma and 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; a dangerous liaison. WCRJ. 2019;6:e1299. 

5. Cabibbo G, Enea M, Attanasio M, Bruix J, Craxì A, Cammà C. A meta‐analysis of survival rates of untreated 
patients in randomized clinical trials of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2010;51(4):1274-83. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):4 59 
 

6. Li J, Zhu X, Chen JY. Building disease-specific drug-protein connectivity maps from molecular interaction 
networks and PubMed abstracts. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009;5(7):e1000450. 

7. Dudley JT, Deshpande T, Butte AJ. Exploiting drug–disease relationships for computational drug 
repositioning. Brief Bioinform. 2011;12(4):303-11. 

8. Jin G, Fu C, Zhao H, Cui K, Chang J, Wong ST. A novel method of transcriptional response analysis to 
facilitate drug repositioning for cancer therapy. Cancer Res. 2012;72(1):33-44. 

9. Hurle MR, Yang L, Xie Q, Rajpal DK, Sanseau P, Agarwal P. Computational drug repositioning: from data to 
therapeutics. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;93(4):335-41. 

10. Ye H, Liu Q, Wei J. Construction of drug network based on side effects and its application for drug 
repositioning. PloS One. 2014;9(2):e87864. 

11. Wang W, Yang S, Zhang X, Li J. Drug repositioning by integrating target information through a 
heterogeneous network model. Bioinformatics. 2014;30(20):2923-30. 

12. Yang J, Li Z, Fan X, Cheng Y. Drug–disease association and drug-repositioning predictions in complex 
diseases using causal inference–probabilistic matrix factorization. J Chem Inf Model. 2014;54(9):2562-9. 

13. Jiao M, Liu G, Xue Y, Ding C. Computational drug repositioning for cancer therapeutics. Curr Top Med Chem. 
2015;15(8):767-75. 

14. Wang H, Gu Q, Wei J, Cao Z, Liu Q. Mining drug–disease relationships as a complement to medical genetics‐
based drug repositioning: Where a recommendation system meets genome‐wide association studies. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2015;97(5):451-4. 

15. Gayvert KM, Dardenne E, Cheung C, Boland MR, Lorberbaum T, Wanjala J, Chen Y, Rubin MA, Tatonetti NP, 
Rickman DS, Elemento O. A computational drug repositioning approach for targeting oncogenic 
transcription factors. Cell Rep. 2016;15(11):2348-56. 

16. Sun P, Guo J, Winnenburg R, Baumbach J. Drug repurposing by integrated literature mining and drug–
gene–disease triangulation. Drug Discov Today. 2017;22(4):615-9. 

17. Vanhaelen Q, Mamoshina P, Aliper AM, Artemov A, Lezhnina K, Ozerov I, Labat I, Zhavoronkov A. Design 
of efficient computational workflows for in silico drug repurposing. Drug Discov Today. 2017;22(2):210-
22. 

18. Greenacre M, Groenen PJ, Hastie T, d’Enza AI, Markos A, Tuzhilina E. Principal component analysis. Nat 
Rev Methods Primers. 2022;2(1):100. 

19. Hosseini S, Al Khaled A. A survey on the imperialist competitive algorithm metaheuristic: implementation 
in engineering domain and directions for future research. Appl. Soft Comput. 2014;24:1078-94. 

20. He X, Gao M, Kan MY, Wang D. Birank: Towards ranking on bipartite graphs. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng. 
2016;29(1):57-71.