ARTICLE 

Cognitive Resource Allocation System with Deep Learning-Based 
Offloading for Enhanced Mobile Computing Performance 

M. Nalini1,* and Sivakumar Vengusamy2 

1Assistant Professor, Department of CT and DS, Sri Krishna Arts and Science College, Coimbatore, India. 
2 Associate Professor, School of Computing, Asia Pacific University of Technology and Innovation (APU), Malaysia. 
*Corresponding Author: M. Nalini. Email: nalini1911@gmail.com  

Received: 10 June Year; Accepted: 12 October 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: Mobile devices with sophisticated hardware and software have emerged as the primary 
computing platforms for the day-to-day activities of individuals. However, computation on these mobile app 
developments is still inhibited by the limited battery power, restricted memory, and limited resources. To 
address this problem, the augmentation of mobile devices with resources from surrounding devices or with 
cloud-based resources has gained popularity in recent years. Existing solutions that follow this approach and 
offload computationally intensive tasks already yield great results for specific use cases. Unfortunately, most 
of these solutions are tailored to specific operating systems or programming languages, and do not support the 
flexible usage of resources. So, the optimization of the resources, the bat optimization-based Resource 
Optimizer, is introduced, which optimizes the resource constraints of mobile devices. For optimizing the 
resources of mobile devices, a model based on a centralized broker-node is proposed in this research work. At 
the same time, the limited battery power of a mobile device is solved by using computational offloading, by 
executing some components of a mobile application in the cloud. This work presents a novel offloading 
algorithm called Deep Neural Network (DNN) is presented. The DNN algorithm will offload as many tasks as 
possible to the cloud when the network transmission bandwidth is high, thereby improving the total execution 
time of all tasks and minimizing the energy use of the mobile device. This research work provides a feasible 
solution for the development of resource-intensive mobile applications and their accessibility by mobile users 
regardless of the resource scarcity of mobile devices.   

KEYWORDS: Mobile Edge Clouding (MEC); Mobile Resource Augmentation; Bat optimization-based resource 
optimizer, Offloading, Deep Neural Networks; Raspberry PI controller; Arduino; MNO cloud. 
 

1 Introduction 
Nowadays, smartphones have become one of the gadgets of all people due to their technological 

advancements, which led to the fast development of resource-intensive applications for watching 
videos, web surfing, interactive gaming, augmented reality, and location tracking, etc. [1] These kinds 
of applications constantly require intensive computational power, memory, and battery. In the 
modern era, a novel approach of a computing model is made possible with the available technologies 
like high-end wireless networks, universal devices for communication, Geographical positioning, the 
internet, etc., have a great impact and form the base for Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC) [2]. It helps 
the users by giving web access to an infinite computational power and memory space. The cloud 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 61 
 

technology eases the overload of complexities, such as storage and computation, that are used in real 
time as a utility.  

Mobile devices have become the global interface for users to access services online and 
applications in the cloud. These are limited to primary techniques, such as either the applications are 
installed on the device, or the same is accessed via a server from mobile devices. The major setback 
for these techniques is the lack of flexibility in service interaction, which limits the chances for 
optimization to provide better performance. The mobile devices are often subjected to resource 
scarcity, mainly the power and the complex computational needs. This made the MCC come into 
existence, which provides resources from a farther end to enable offloading of complex 
computational tasks and thereby addressing the problem of scarcity in resources. In spite of these 
advances, the users are not able to make the fullest use of the technology because of the Hubs present 
as intermediate, the exponential increase in traffic of the network, and the non-availability of high-
end end connectivity between the device and the server in a typical MCC model [3].  

 The motivation for this interest is the deficiency of computing resources and their 
manageability. In addition, distributed databases and multitier applications handling hundreds and 
thousands of requests demand more computing resources. More computing resource means more 
power and complexity, thus increasing the cost of the solutions. Consequently, to overcome the 
drawbacks of mobile cloud computing, MEC [4] emerges, which provides cloud computing and 
services closer to the mobile device. Organizations are seeking outsourced solutions, such as those 
provided by MCC and Edge Computing (EC). EC solutions include MEC, cloudlet-based computing, 
and fog computing (FC). Clearly, there is a difference between MCC and EC approaches. However, 
both serve the same purpose of providing computing resources for resource-limited devices. In MCC, 
computations are performed in the core network (cloud). In MEC, computations are performed on 
the network edge, maintaining closer proximity to the user, preferably in the base station of the radio 
access network (RAN) [5]. 

Edge computing is a middleware between mobile devices and cloud servers, thereby providing 
cloud resources at the edge of the network with minimum delay. The MEC is a technology which 
works to bring closer to the users of applications and content. (e.g., at base stations, access points, 
and aggregation networks) to minimize the latency and to maximize the operations in a network, 
ensuring the service delivery. Hence, this is a new theory for providing complex computations in the 
edge networks closer to the mobile devices in order to ensure speed in execution time of the 
applications and also to minimize the energy consumption of the devices [6].  

MCC has been coined to augment the capability of such handheld devices. MCC empowers the 
application processing capabilities of the mobile devices by offloading computationally intensive 
applications to resource-rich distributed application processing systems. But the key challenge lies 
in the seamless distribution of the applications on the distributed application processing cloud 
platforms. Researchers have explored varied resources for the augmentation of mobile device 
capabilities. There has been a substantial rise in requests for multimedia data, such as videos and 
games, over mobile phones. If at all there is a significant growth in improvisation of network capacity, 
the device hardware has always been hindrances such as poor resources, insecurity and unstable 
connections, and energy consumption. The non-availability of adequate resources has always been a 
great constraint for many applications [7].  

Resource Augmentation is one of the best augmentation models that uses high resources in 
clouds to improve the overall performance of the Mobile Cloud Computing. This aims for the 
execution of tasks that require complex computation and the applications that tend to use a large 
number of resources. The augmented devices are particularly focused on executing large 
computations and storing very large data, which are normally beyond their ability, with a minimum 
footprint and security. Researchers utilize varied cloud-based computing resources (e.g., distant 



62 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

clouds and nearby mobile nodes) to meet various computing requirements of mobile users [8]. 
Therefore, the computation offloading technology in the MEC can effectively enhance the 
computation capability of mobile devices. 

The concept of offloading the computational tasks has got a large attention among the research 
community in the domains of cloud and mobile computing. These aim to remove the major pitfalls of 
a conventional mobile computing by augmenting he capability with other resources outside. In 
general, the concepts of offloading and augmentation are synonymous and are used to minimize the 
limitations of a mobile device in terms of computational complexity, Storage, and Power 
consumption. Partitioning and offloading some parts of mobile applications is a promising method of 
saving time and energy for mobile devices with constrained resources. Most of the current research 
work has focused on how to design effective offloading systems to save time and energy while giving 
limited consideration to enabling techniques. Moreover, researchers have paid attention to different 
computational resources in offloading frameworks. So, the MEC reduces network operational cost 
and also upgrades the quality of service (QoS) by outsourcing computation tasks to the network 
edges [9].  

In this research work, the optimization of the resources, the bat optimization-based Resource 
Optimizer, is introduced, which optimizes the resource constraints of mobile devices. A novel 
offloading algorithm called Deep Neural Network (DNN) is presented. The DNN algorithm will offload 
as many tasks as possible to the cloud when the network transmission bandwidth is high, thereby 
improving the total execution time of all tasks and minimizing the energy use of the mobile device. 

This work is framed as follows: Section I introduces mobile edge computing, offloading, and 
resource augmentation concepts; Section II presents the related works for mobile resource 
augmentation. In section III, the proximate computing framework for mobile resource augmentation 
is discussed and explains the intelligent inventory checker application, which is the implementation 
of the proposed framework; In section IV discusses the results from the computing entities are 
discussed. Section V presents the conclusions and future work. 

2 Related Works 
Kovachev et al [10] proposed a technique termed MACS (Mobile Augmentation Cloud Services). 

This makes it possible for a mobile client to run an application in the cloud by extending the Android 
application. The standard procedures of Android development are used. The use of middleware is to 
lift the heavy task of adaptive application partitioning, the monitoring of the resources that are used, 
and the offloading of complex computations. These work both as a normal mobile application and 
also it can also make use of the computational resources available in a far place in a transparent 
manner. A couple of prototypes have been developed, which clearly indicate that the energy saving 
is up to 95% when the offloading technique is used for long and complex computational tasks, when 
compared with that of the available methods, where local execution alone takes place.  

Kemp et al [11] presented the first practical implementation idea for Android: the cuckoo 
framework, which simplifies the development of smartphone applications that benefit from 
computation offloading and provides a dynamic runtime system that can, at runtime, decide whether 
a part of an application will be executed locally or remotely. They evaluated the Cuckoo framework 
with two real-world smartphone applications, an object recognition application and a distributed 
augmented reality smartphone game, and showed that little work was required to enable 
computation offloading for these applications using the Cuckoo framework. 

Orsini et al [12] presented the evaluation of Cloud Aware, a context-adaptive mobile middleware 
for MCC as well as MEC that supports automated context adaptation by linking the distribution 
features of mobile middleware with context-aware self-adaptation techniques. In particular, present 
a system software infrastructure and a data mining process that facilitate the development of elastic, 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 63 
 

scalable, and context-adaptive mobile applications and present their evaluation using real usage data 
provided by the Nokia Mobile Data Challenge (MDC) dataset. 

 Quoc et al [13] proposed an optimization framework for computation offloading and resource 
allocation for MEC with multiple servers. This work adopted a suboptimal approach by splitting the 
original problem into two parts: (i) computation offloading decision and (ii) joint resource allocation. 
To enable distributed computation offloading, two matching algorithms are investigated. Moreover, 
the transmit power of offloading users is found using a bisection method with approximate inter-cell 
interference, and the computation resources allocated to offloading users are achieved via the duality 
approach. Simulation results validate that the proposed framework can significantly improve the 
percentage of offloading users and reduce the system overhead with respect to the existing schemes.  

Shiraz et al [14] proposed a novel distributed Energy Efficient Computational Offloading 
Framework (EECOF) for the processing of intensive mobile applications in Mobile Cloud Computing 
(MCC). The framework focuses on leveraging application processing services of cloud datacenters 
with minimal instances of computationally intensive component migration at runtime. As a result, 
the size of data transmission and energy consumption cost is reduced in computational offloading for 
MCC. Hence, EECOF provides an energy-efficient application layer solution for computational 
offloading in MCC. 

Deng et al [15] proposed a novel offloading system to design robust offloading decisions for 
mobile services. This approach considers the dependency relations among component services and 
aims to optimize execution time and energy consumption of executing mobile services. To this end, 
we also introduce a mobility model and a trade-off fault-tolerance mechanism for the offloading 
system. A genetic algorithm (GA) based offloading method is then designed and implemented after 
carefully modifying parts of a generic GA to match these special needs for the stated problem.  

Shiraz et al [16] proposed an active service migration (ASM) framework for computational 
offloading to cloud datacenters, which employs a lightweight procedure for the deployment of a 
runtime distributed platform. The proposed framework employs a coarse granularity level and 
simple developmental and deployment procedures for computational offloading in MCC. ASM is 
evaluated by benchmarking a prototype application on the Android devices in the real MCC 
environment. It is found that the turnaround time of the application reduces up to 45 % and ECC of 
the application reduces up to 33 % in ASM-based computational offloading, as compared to 
traditional offloading techniques, which shows the lightweight nature of the proposed framework for 
computational offloading. 

Kumar and Malik [17] proposed a context-based computation augmentation framework to 
balance the competing goals. It incorporates individual contextual demands in its optimization 
engine to dynamically adjust its offloading decisions. In addition, it also proposed an adaptive virtual 
machine (VM) provisioning technique for efficient utilization of cloud resources and maintaining the 
QoS. Evaluate the design space of the proposed system by extending the CloudSim simulator. The 
experimental results show that the proposed system can provide contextual augmentation services 
with QoS and low costs. 

Nir et al [18] focused on and proposed a centralized broker-node architecture which manages 
resource monitoring on behalf of all mobile devices. In the centralized architecture, mathematical 
models for the task scheduling problem in the local resources case and the mobile cloud computing 
case were proposed to optimally minimize the total energy consumption across all mobile devices. A 
generalized model for the task scheduling problem was proposed. The models found optimal 
solutions for the centralized task scheduling problems, and an improvement in the total costs was 
observed when offloading with optimization compared to when offloading without optimization 
using the centralized task scheduler. 



64 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

Zhou et al [19] introduced a technique of offloading that is aware of the contexts for every device 
to make an offloading decision that relies upon the changes in their contexts in an MCC that is 
normally heterogeneous. Two algorithms, one online and the other offline, are based on the 
framework of ski-rental, ensuring optimized performance when offloading and scheduling decisions 
are taken. This focuses on reducing the time complexity, offloading of the tasks and balancing the 
loads and also addresses the major issue of the battery limit and enhancement of the offloading. At 
last, a mechanism which is based on the concept of reverse auction was introduced for the increased 
utilization and participation of the newly proposed offloading methods in the mobile cloud 
environment. The results show that there is a notable increase in the efficiency of computation, 
rationale and auction results that are optimal.  

Dong et al [20] presented a comprehensive offloading and resource management framework for 
embedded systems, which aims to ensure predictable response time performance while minimizing 
energy consumption. Here developed two offloading algorithms were developed within the 
framework, which decide the task components that shall be offloaded so that both goals can be 
achieved simultaneously. This framework was fully implemented on an Android smartphone 
platform. An in-depth evaluation using representative Android applications and benchmarks 
demonstrates that our proposed offloading framework dominates existing approaches in terms of 
timing predictability while effectively reducing energy consumption. 

Dou et al [21] presented a framework which provides a powerful software abstraction that hides 
many of the complexities from the application developer. Design and implement a mobile MapReduce 
framework targeted at any device which supports Python and network connectivity. The master 
server node is responsible for assigning tasks to workers when the worker node requests work. The 
server is also responsible for handling intermediary data generated by the mapping tasks and 
preparing it for input into the reduce tasks. The implementation of this system is based on a test bed 
of Nokia N95 8GB smartphones and demonstrates the feasibility and performance. 

Elgazzar et al [33] presented a framework for cloud-assisted mobile service provisioning to 
assist mobile devices in delivering reliable services. The framework supports dynamic offloading 
based on the resource status of mobile systems and current network conditions, while satisfying the 
user-defined energy constraints. It also enables the mobile provider to delegate the cloud 
infrastructure to forward the service response directly to the user when no further processing is 
required by the provider. Performance evaluation shows up to 6x latency improvement for 
computation-intensive services that do not require large data transfer. 

Gonzalez et al [23] proposed a novel fine-grained application model that supports complex 
module dependencies such as sequential, conditional, and parallel module executions. The model 
also allows for multiple offloading decisions that are tailored towards the current application, 
network, or user contexts. As a result, the model is more precise in capturing the structure of the 
application and supports more complex offloading solutions. Second, proposed three cost models, 
namely, average-based, statistics-based and interval-based cost models, defined for the proposed 
application model. This cost model can be used to perform statistical analysis of the performance of 
the application in different scenarios, such as varying network data rates. This work provides a 
robust formulation that solves a linear number of linear optimization problems. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
The proposed proximate computing framework exploits soft computing methodologies for 

augmenting the limited resources of mobile devices. The proposed framework consists of five major 
building blocks, namely: mobile device, context Manager, Resource Augmentation, Quality of Service 
(QoS) provider and Billing & Cost block, which are depicted in Figure 1. Each block will be explained 
in a detailed manner. In the mobile device block, the process of the Resource Analyzer & Estimator 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 65 
 

component framework is presented. In the context Manager Block, it chooses the appropriate 
proximate computing entity. The Resource Augmentation block includes a scheduler and 
synchronizer. The scheduler allocates resources of computing entities between mobile users and 
their tasks. In the QoS provider block dealt with, three significant parameters, namely security, fault 
tolerance, and platform independence. Finally billing & cost block is included for cost estimation 
purposes. Each block will be explained in a detailed manner in the section below. The proposed 
proximate computing framework for Mobile Resource Augmentation is shown in Fig. 1. 

 

Figure 1: Proximate Computing framework for Mobile Resource Augmentation 

3.1 Mobile Device Block 
In the mobile device block, the Resource Analyzer & Estimator component consists of three sub-

modules, namely configuration assembler, task partitioning, and offloading manager. 



66 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

3.1.1 Configuration Assembler 
The configuration assembler mines parameters about the mobile device, resource-intensive 

tasks, and network parameters. 

3.1.2 Task partitioning 
Task partitioning divides resource-intensive tasks into thread-level subtasks, which aid the 

offloading manager in identifying offload and non-offload subtasks. 

3.1.3 Offloading Manager 
Offloading is feasible only when local execution time is greater than the offloading time and the 

remote execution time. Two types of offloading are proposed in the framework, namely i) implicit or 
automatic offloading and ii) explicit or manual offloading. Implicit offloading restricts the mobile user 
from exploiting excessive resources in a mobile device by setting a resource-accessing limit or 
threshold limit. Explicit offloading is performed after getting a response from the mobile user.   

Resource Analyzer & Estimator component advocates offloading, the most popular energy-
saving technique. As shown in Figure 3, offloading is the process of transferring resource-intensive 
tasks from the mobile device to proximate computing entities like WiFi Gateway, edge cloud, 
Raspberry PI controller, Arduino to execute the task and also sends back the result of the task to the 
mobile device. 

3.2 Offloading technique using Deep Neural Network (DNN) 
Offloading is a cloud computing technique that is used to run programs and provide content 

when there a computing-restricted environments. Complex tasks require higher computing power. 
If the target device has insufficient computing power, the QoS of the provided contents/programs 
decreases. In this study, the offloading technique is implemented with the help of a Deep Neural 
Network (DNN) executes a few components of the applications that are in a cloud environment and 
installed in a mobile device.  

Unlike traditional learning, Deep learning is considered a method of learning where the 
computing systems understand how patterns are recognized and classified from the raw data that is 
unlabeled(unsupervised) instead of an algorithm that works for a specific task of a general neural 
network (supervised). The basic futuristic characters lie under various layers that are hidden, and 
hence, acquiring the name deep learning. These models are intended to make the computers learn 
independently by identifying the features that decide the character of data using specially designed 
algorithms. Specific algorithms for sorting and ordering are done as the deep neural networks have 
various layers that include input, hidden and output layers. This process is termed “Feature 
Hierarchy”.  

Deep learning introduces an approach with multiple layers in order to understand the 
representations of data that are performed with the neural network comprising different layers. 

This is similar to other machine learning algorithms, and the learning is achieved by mapping 
the targets to the features through a process of transformations of data that are simple and by 
feedback signals.  The significance of DNA is that learning takes place in successive layers of 
representations that bear meaning. The subject is not widely approached owing to its simplicity, but 
it has proven to be highly successful for the prediction of a variety of problems.  

Practically speaking, the neural networks perform tasks that are similar to the human brain. The 
underlying concept of the neural network has an input, an output, and a hidden layer. The data is 
read from the inputs given by the user, and the actual learning takes place in the hidden layer, and 
the output layer projects the results.  



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 67 
 

Neural networks are simple at the surface level, but the same to be implementing them to see 
their real working ability requires enormous data for the neural net for learning and also incurs a 
very high computational cost. This makes the real-time creation of a neural network practically 
impossible. A great thanks to the development of advanced hardware, such as GPUs, which made the 
computational tasks more practical and also the rapid growth of data and the collection of the same 
made it relevant. The development of suitable algorithms helped in removing many constraints to 
develop a deep neural network [24]. These improvements over time have substantially increased the 
opportunity to run even very deep and highly parameterized neural networks that are known as deep 
neural networks (DNNs). 

3.3 Feed-forward DNN 
These are layers that are connected densely, where all the successful layers are influenced by the 

inputs and which in turn influence the final output. Deep networks are the normal neural networks which 
have many layers that are hidden.  

The four important components required to construct a feed-forward DNN are  
a) Input data 
b) Suitable network architecture 
c) A defined mechanism for feedback through which learning is achieved.  
d) A training model 
The following section gives a gist of the components to construct a feed-forward DNN for the 

offloading technique. 

3.4 Network architecture 
Figure 2 depicts the Architecture of a Feed-Forward DNN. The layers and the activation are the 

important factors to be considered when developing the architecture of a network. 

 
Figure 2: Architecture of Feed-Forward Deep Neural Network 

3.5 Layers and nodes 
The basic components of a DNN are its layers and nodes, which decide upon how complex the 

network will be. The condensed layers are those in which all the successful layers are connected. 
Obviously, when more and more nodes and layers are added, it provides more opportunities for the newly 
added feature to be learnt (Capacity of the model). Apart from the input layer, which consists of predictor 
variables, there exist two other layers that are important, namely the hidden layers and the output layer. 

3.5.1 Hidden layers 
Selecting the hidden layer is vital in selecting the DNN, and the number of nodes deployed in the 

same is directly responsible for the number of features in the data. Mostly, all the layers have many 
nodes that are fewer than the number of features. Lastly, the computation overheads are borne by 



68 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

the number of hidden layers and nodes that are involved. Lastly, the goal is to identify a model which 
is simple and performs at an optimum level. 

3.5.2 Output layers 
The model type determines the output layer. Only one node will be present in the output layer 

for regressive problems, and that node will continuously predict a numeric output. When 
multinomial output is being predicted, the output layer has the same number of nodes as the classes 
that are being predicted. 

3.6 Activation 
The important function of a neural network is its activation. This works similarly to that of biological 

neurons, where the neurons get constant input and when a threshold value is reached, the same is 
activated, which shows the existence of a signal. The information flow is given in Figure 3. 

3.6.1 Activation functions 
All the nodes in a layer are connected with all other nodes in the previous layer [25]. A weight is 

assigned to each connection and is multiplied by the weight of the corresponding connections with 
an additional bias. The total of these will be the function. 

 
Figure 3: Flow of information in a neuron 

These are mathematical functions that identify that there are enough inputs that are informative on 
a node and trigger signals to the following layer. This requires a determined network structure of layers 
where each layer is completely connected with the adjacent layer. A common network structure has an 
input, a hidden and an output layer. The weights are adapted based on the errors calculated in the input 
patterns, and the technique is feed-forward from the output layer via the input. The function of activation 
in any given network is denoted by, 

𝑦𝑖 = ∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑊𝑖𝑗𝑥𝑖    (1) 

1
𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑 ∶ 𝑓(𝑥) =  

1+𝑒−𝑥    (2) 

The linear activation is done for the outputs that are expected for the problems of regression, and 
the problems that are of the classification type are taken care of by the sigmoid activation function. The 
classifications that are multinomial normally use the softmax activation function. The probability 
provides the optimum solution for the network in a critical state. 

Algorithm 1: Feed-forward DNN algorithm for offloading a network model 
This training algorithm provides a high-level pseudocode for preparing a network. 
Node: It is the base unit for computing denoted as single circle.  



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 69 
 

Layer: A set of nodes that have a similar index and type.  
Connection: A relation that has a weight in between nodes of different layers 
W: The connection’s weight  
I: The node given as input from the neural network 
H: Hidden node (The value of all the weights put together of an input layer or the layers that are 

hidden.  
HA: Activated node that is hidden. Hidden node activated (the value of node that is hidden and which 

is passed to a function that is predefined) 
O: The node which comes as an output. (The total weight of the hidden layer taken recently) 
OA: Output node activated (The output from the neural network that passes over a function which 

is predefined.   
B: Bias node (A constant value set to 1.0) 
e: Total difference between the actual output and the expected value(s) of a network. The errors are 

computed in terms of metrics such as mean squared error, entropy, etc. 
Step 1: Initialization 

The primary and initial step after the design of a neural network is its initialization.  
• Initialize all weights W1 through W12 with a random number and from a normal distribution, i.e. 

~N(0, 1). 
•  Set all bias nodes B1 = B2 = 1.0. 
Note: care to be taken to remember that the distribution’s variance can be a value that is different 

cause it affects the convergence. 
Step 2: Feed-Forward 

As the name indicates, it is performed to go forward and compute all the possible values for any 
hidden layer considered and the output layer.  

• All the input needs are initialized. 
•  The values of the hidden nodes are calculated. 

𝐻1 = 𝐼1𝑊1 + 𝐼2𝑊3 + 𝐵1𝑊5    (3) 

𝐻2 = 𝐼1𝑊2 + 𝐼2𝑊4 + 𝐵1𝑊6    (4) 

• The activation function is defined for the hidden layer; for instance, the Sigmoid function: 

1
𝑆(𝑥) =

1+𝑒−𝑥    (5) 

• Calculate hidden node activation values: 

1
𝐻𝐴1 =     (6  

1+𝑒−𝐻 )
1

1
𝐻𝐴2 =    

1+𝑒−𝐻  (7) 
2

• Calculate output node values: 



70 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

𝑂1 = 𝐻𝐴1𝑊7 +  𝐻𝐴2𝑊9 + 𝐵2𝑊11    (8) 

𝑂2 = 𝐻𝐴1𝑊8 +  𝐻𝐴2𝑊10 + 𝐵2𝑊12    (9) 

• Select an activation function for the output layer; for example, the linear function: 

𝑦 = 𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑥    (10) 

• Calculate output node activation values: 

𝑂𝐴1 = 𝑂1    (11) 

𝑂𝐴2 = 𝑂2    (12) 

• Calculate the total error; if OAi is the obtained output value for node i, then let yi be the desired 
output 

1
𝑒 = ∑4 (𝑦 𝐴 ) 2   1 )

𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖 − 𝑂 𝑖   ( 3  

After the first pass, the error will be substantial, but we can use an algorithm called 
backpropagation to adjust the weights to reduce the error between the output of the network and 
the desired values. 

Step 3: Backpropagation 

When the model is run for the first time, or in a forward pass, A series of observations is recorded 
by the DNN that assigns weights randomly between all the connections of a node and the prediction of 
output is done. Back Propagation is termed as the process by which a neural network, by itself, assesses 
its performance and adjusts the weights between all the connections of the node to improve the accuracy. 
The objective of this is to adjust the weights in an incremental fashion to enable the networks to come up 
with values that are very close when compared to the expected values obtained from the training data.  

Backpropagation is used for adjusting the weight of the network with the formula, 

𝑊𝑘+1 𝜕𝑒
= 𝑊𝑘

𝑖 𝑖 − 𝜂     14)
𝜕𝑊𝑘 (  

𝑖

𝜕𝑒
Where k is the iteration number, η is the learning rate (typically a small number), and:  is t e

𝜕𝑊𝑘  h  
𝑖

total error’s derivation with respect to the adjusted weight. In this process, a formula is derived for 
every individual weight present in a network, which also includes the weights allotted for 
connections. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 71 
 

Step 4: Model training 

Once a base model is created, Training is to be given from the available data. To achieve this, the 
model is fed into a fit function in addition to the training data. The model which is optimum is to be found 
for producing and running the DNN model. These are done using various parameters, including the 
capacity of the model, normalization of the batch, dropout and regularization weight and learning rate. 

𝑌 = 𝐹(𝑦𝑖𝑛)    (15) 

Based on the Y value, execution of the subtask is decided. After applying the activation function 
in the training algorithm, based on the output value of Y, the subtask is executed in three different 
ways, namely local execution in the mobile device itself (Y value < 0.5), implicit offloading (Y value is 
between 0.5 & 1) and explicit offloading (Y value > 1). As depicted in Figure 4, the proposed system 
exploits the adaptive reinforcement learning neural network to choose the offloading method based 
on the input values from the resource analyzer and estimator. In an adaptive neural network, the 
overall input-output behaviour is determined by a collection of modifiable parameters from the 
configuration assembler (x1) and task partitioning (x2). Under reinforcement learning, supervised 
learning advocates explicit offloading and unsupervised learning promotes implicit offloading. 

              < 0.5           local execution   

       Y =       >=0.5 and <=1  implicit offloading   (16) 

           >1         explicit offloading 

3.7 Context Manager Block 
In this block, the context Manager chooses the appropriate proximate computing entity. After 

deciding offloading mode, the Context manager exploits a Genetic Algorithm to select the optimal 
proximate computing entity. Context Manager chooses the appropriate proximate computing entity 
based on the input from its three subcomponents, namely a) location-aware service, b) pre-fetcher 
service and c) user preference service. The Fig.4. shows the selection of a Proximate computing entity. 

3.7.1 Location Aware Service (LAS) 
The location-based service provides validation with reference to the different networking 

services. This is done to identify the efficiency of the location-based service to access various 
networking services. Location-aware service (LAS) provides the following attributes of the mobile 
device and Proximate Computing Entity (PCE) by exploiting the NearBy connection API. 

LAS = {𝑐𝑚𝑙𝑜𝑛, 𝑐𝑚𝑙𝑎𝑡 , 𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 , 𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 , 𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛}    (17) 

Where 
cmlon     - current longitude of the mobile device 
cmlat        - current latitude of the mobile device 
pcetsize     - size of the task  
pcetexetime - execution of the time of the task 
pcetenecon     - energy consumed by the task 



72 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

 

Figure 4: Selecting a Proximate computing entity 
3.7.2 Pre-Fetcher Service (PFS) 

Different wireless access technologies like Wi-Fi/3G/4G exploit different amounts of energy 
and support different data transfer rates. Since the location of the mobile user is not fixed, offloading 
must ensure retransmission of lost packets due to network disconnection or lower signal strength. 
The functionality of Pre-fetcher is to assist the context manager with proximate computing entity 
information whenever the user changes their location. Depending on the user’s location, all updated 
content will be pre-fetched and cached. All cached content will be notified to the context manager, 
and this content will be post-fetched if required with respect to the location. Pre-fetch service (PFS) 
provides the updated attributes of the mobile location and proximate computing entity (PCE). 

𝑃𝐹𝑆 = {𝑛𝑚𝑙𝑜𝑛, 𝑛𝑚𝑙𝑎𝑡 , 𝑛𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 , 𝑛𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒, 𝑛𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡, 𝑛 𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛}    (18) 

Where 
nmlon           - new longitude of the mobile device 
nmlat            - new latitude of the mobile device 
npcetsize        - size of the task  
npcetexetime       - the execution time of the task 
npcetenecon        - energy consumed by the task 

3.7.3 User Preference Service (UPS) 
User preference modes such as power saving mode, low-cost mode, high processing mode, and 

high storage mode have played a vital role in the selection of a proximate computing entity. For 
example, low-cost mode exploits the computing entity without any Internet connection. High 
processing mode advocates faster response to the mobile user by exploiting a resource-rich 
computing entity. User preference mode is expressed as an XML document and is depicted below. 

<?xml version=”1.0” encoding=”UTF-8”?> 

  <user_preference_mode> 

     <power_saving offload=”yes”>  battery_capacity       </power_saving> 

     <low_cost offload=”yes|no” Internet_con=”no”   cloud_service=”no”>   

                         execution_cost 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 73 
 

      </low_cost> 

     <high_proc offloading=”yes” cloud_service=”yes|no”>  

                           response_time 

      </high_proc> 

     <high_storage offloading=”yes” cloud_service=”yes”>  

                           storage_space 

      </high_storage> 

  </user_preference_mode> 

 

Algorithm 2: Pseudo Code of a genetic algorithm to find an optimal proximate computing 
entity.     

BEGIN 
     List the existing proximate computing entities; 
     Compute the fitness value of each computing entity; 
 WHILE NOT finished DO LOOP 
    BEGIN 
   Selection; 

Apply ordinal based Rank Selection method to elect the best computing entities from the 
existing pool;                    

    Reproduction; 
Apply whole arithmetic recombination crossover and optional Random resetting Mutation; 

    Evolution; 
Compute the fitness value of new computing entity; 

    Replacement; 
Replace old computing entity with a new one; 

    Termination; 
   IF existing list has converged THEN 
                     finished : = TRUE; 
   ENDIF; 

  END; 
END; 

In the genetic algorithm, the rank selection is applied to select the best proximate computing 
entity. Moreover, rank selection advocates computing entities with closer fitness values. Every 
computing entity is ranked according to its fitness values. Higher-ranked computing entity is 
preferred over a lower-ranked computing entity. Fitness function F is implemented as an inverse 
objective function of input parameters from the Location-aware service, Pre-fetcher service and User 
preference service. 



74 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

1
𝐹 =     (19) 

(𝑙𝑠+𝑝𝑠+𝑢𝑝−𝑡)

Where ls is a location-aware service parameter, ps is a pre-fetcher service parameter, up is a 
user preference parameter, and t is a threshold value. 
3.8 Resource augmentation block 

The Resource Augmentation block includes a scheduler and synchronizer. The scheduler allocates 
resources of computing entities between mobile users and their tasks. This work focused on three 
different types of services: native execution, proximate or edge cloud and Arduino computing services. 
Consider the following list, which consists of n proximate computing entities. 

𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑡 = {𝑝𝑐𝑒1, 𝑝𝑐𝑒2, 𝑝𝑐𝑒3 … 𝑝𝑐𝑒𝑛}    (20) 

Consider a task t that consists of m subtasks. 

𝑡 = { 𝑠𝑡1, 𝑠𝑡2, 𝑠𝑡3 … 𝑠𝑡𝑚}    (21) 

3.9 Task Scheduling 
After selecting the appropriate offloading method from the Deep Neural Network and proximate 

computing entity from the genetic algorithm proposed system exploits Bat optimization-based Resource 
Optimizer is introduced which optimizes the resource constraints of mobile devices. For optimizing the 
resources of mobile devices, a model is performed based on a centralized broker-node to schedule 
subtasks in the selected proximate computing entity.  

Since the Task Scheduling plays a significant role in improving the flexibility and reliability in the 
Resource Augmentation block. The ultimate reason behind scheduling tasks for resource augmentation 
involves the technique of finding the best sequence in several tasks. The task scheduling selects the 
appropriate resource which is available for task execution in an effective manner, in which completion 
time and battery power are reduced as far as possible. The sub-tasks are selected as per the priorities, as 
well as assigned to the selected proximate computing entity. 

 
Figure 5: Centralized broker node model for resource Augmentation 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 75 
 

The proposed centralized broker model is employed for the resource augmentation of mobile 
devices. Though the proposed work extends the optimization process by including the Bat 
optimization [26] algorithm. The model presented in this work is enhanced to make it more realistic. 
This proposed work is modelled using the BAT optimization algorithm with adjustable parameters 
to schedule the sub-tasks. 

On behalf of all the mobile devices, the centralized node gathers resource descriptions from all 
the service nodes in the system. The centralized node consolidates all the resource descriptions and 
uses this information when scheduling task offloading on behalf of all mobile devices in the system. 
Thus, the centralized node can find the best available resources for all the mobile devices based on 
their requirements and offloading goals. In this way, the mobile devices need not repeatedly contact 
all the service nodes for resource monitoring. The centralized node was referred to as broker node. 
Also, in this work, the location of the task scheduler is the centralized broker-node, as shown in Figure 
5. The various steps involved while scheduling tasks from mobile devices onto the resources in the 
selected proximate computing entity which include:  
1. Mobile devices contact the centralized task scheduling service at the broker-node,  
2. The task scheduler decides the appropriate offloading location on behalf of the mobile devices 
by minimizing the total energy consumption and the total monetary cost across all mobile devices 
subject to various constraints, and  
3. Based on the task scheduling decision, each task is either offloaded or it is executed locally on 
the mobile device. Using the broker-node, the communication between the two scenarios differs at: 
(i) the infrastructural level, (ii) the location of the TaskScheduler() service, and (iii) the mechanism 
for the resource monitoring process is depicted in Figure 6. 
4. At the infrastructural level, the centralized broker model includes a centralized broker-node. 
5. The TaskScheduler() service that manages task offloading is utilized on the mobile devices. 
6. On behalf of all the mobile devices using the ResourceMonitor() service, the RB Client() service 
in the mobile devices can get resource descriptions of all the service nodes just by contacting only 
the ServerApp() service in the broker-node. 
7. The centralized broker-node also uses the ServerApp() service to accept resource description 
requests from the RB client() service in the mobile devices. 

 
Figure 6: Centralized broker scenario. 

Algorithm 3: Priority-based Bat Optimisation algorithm to execute the subtask. 

Input : ‘m’ number of subtasks and a single proximate computing entity (pce) 
Output : finding priority order and execution of the subtask.  

Assign no. of tasks f(x), X= (x1, x2, ………xd)T 

Initialize sub tasks xi (I = 1, 2, ……n) and vi 

Define priority order fi at xi 



76 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

Initialize computing entity ri and execution of sub task Ai 

While ( t < Max number of iterations) 
Generate new solutions by adjusting priority, and 
Updating priority order and locations/solutions 
 If ( rand >ri) 
 Select a solution among the best solutions 
 Generate a local solution around the selected best solution 
 end if 
 Generate a new solution by selecting subtask randomly 
 if (rand < Ai & f(xi) < f(x.)) 

 Accept the new solutions 
 Increase ri and reduce Ai 

 end if 
Rank the priority and find the best subtask x. 
end while  
Results / visualizations 
 

Algorithm 4: Pseudo-code of the proposed algorithm 

Step 1: for each task T consider User’s Requests 
Step 2: Split T into Sub_tasks (Ti) 
Step 3: Call Bat_algo(Sub_task) 
Step 4: Iterate (Repeat Bat_algo until Best_sol) 
Step 5: end; 
Step 6: Apply Column Maxima to Best_sol 
Step 7: Schedule thus obtained is the input to Computing entity 
 
3.10 Task Scheduling 

And the proposed system, three blocks: mobile device, context manager and resource 
augmentation, has contained synchronizer component. Figure 7 depicts the functionality of the 
synchronizer, which facilitates the faster updating of data between the mobile device and proximate 
computing entities.  

Mobile Device Proximate Computing 

Synchronizer Entities 

 
 

Figure 7: Synchronization 

3.11 Quality of service (Qos) provider block 
Three significant parameters, namely security, fault tolerance and platform independence, are dealt 

with in the QOS provider block. Exploitation of fewer Internet or no Internet connectivity ensures security 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 77 
 

in the proposed framework. In case of failure in the current proximate computing entity, fault tolerance 
ensures the availability of computation as a service from another proximate computing entity. Platform-
independent feature authorizes mobile devices with any mobile operating system, such as Android, 
BlackBerry, Windows Mobile and iOS to access the computing services. The proposed framework 
augments the resources of the mobile device by providing computation as a service to the mobile device. 
3.12 Execution steps for the proposed framework 

The flow of operations to augment the limited resources of mobile devices in the proposed 
proximate computing framework is depicted in Figure 8. A requisition for augmenting mobile resources 
is initiated after the submission of the task by the mobile user. Now, mobile resource augmentation is 
done by providing computation as a service to the mobile user or the task is executed locally as per the 
internal operations of the proposed framework.  

 
Figure 8: Flowchart for Proposed Framework Execution 



78 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

Algorithm 5: Execution of Proposed Framework and Pseudo Code of Building Block Operations 

Begin; 
for each mobile user request do 
if offloader > 0 then 
    Fetch (computing entities from context manager) ; 
    Scheduler (from resource augmentation);         
    QOS parameters (from QOS provider) 
                         if execution succeed then 
                            Synchronize data; 
                            Computation as a service; 
             else 
                        Handle Error; retry or terminate execution; 
        else 
        Local Execution; 
Execution Finished; 
End. 

3.13 Intelligent Inventory Checker 
In this inventory checker Mobile Application, two proximate computing entities, namely Arduino 

and edge cloud, provided computation as a service by executing the resource-intensive task of checking 
reorder level.  In supermarkets, the supervisor needs to do regular reviews of product availability. If 
there is any shortage, then the supervisor must place an order to sustain stocks to a predetermined level. 
This task necessitates more processing time and energy consumption and may lead to customer 
dissatisfaction and customer loss. So, this resource-intensive task of checking reorder level is offloaded to 
a proximate computing entity, namely Arduino, edge cloud, thereby providing a seamless user experience 
to the customer. Therefore, an intelligent inventory checker mobile application is automated and 
executed in three different methods, namely Native Mobile App, Proximate Cloud and Arduino 
application. 
Task: Inventory Checker  
Method 1: Native Mobile App (Android OS) 
Algorithm 6: 
Step 1: Instantiate a Sensor Manager Object.  
Step 2: Registers a Sensor Event Listener to read the raw data of the proximity sensor for every five 
seconds. 
Step 3: Inside get Maximum Range() method of Sensor object, Calculate stock value. 
Step 4: Display the inventory details such as item id, item name, the image of the item on mobile.  
Step 5: Find the execution time of the code by invoking System. Current Time Millis() method and 
energy consumed by using Power tutor. 

The Native MobileApp for checking the reorder level of the stock is depicted in Figure 9. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 79 
 

 
Figure 9: Intelligent Inventory Checker Mobile App 

Method 2: Proximate Cloud  
As shown in Figure 10, the proposed IoT application using IBM Bluemix sends SMS and email 

notifications to the supervisor whenever the size of stock is reduced to the reorder level. Node-RED 
is a programming tool for connecting hardware devices, APIs and online services. This instance is 
running as an IBM Bluemix application, giving it access to the wide range of services available on the 
platform.  
Algorithm 7: 
Step 1: Create an IBM Bluemix account. 
Step 2: Enter into Node-RED flow editor. 
Step 3: Design a flow with required nodes. 
Step 4: Deploy it and test with JSON input. 
Step 5: Display the inventory details such as item id, item name, the image of the item. 

 
Figure 10: Node-RED flow design for Inventory Checker 

Method 3: Arduino application 
The proposed system automates an intelligent inventory checker with an Arduino and an 

Intranet/Internet web programming to find the shortage, which is indicated by an automated SMS 
process to help maintain adequate stock. The architecture of the Inventory Checker application is 
depicted in Figure 11. The proposed system consists of the following four modules, namely the 
intelligent stock checker, the Stock monitor, SMS integration, and Cloud deployment. 
Intelligent stock checker: This Arduino-based intelligent stock checker alerts the supervisor by 
blinking the LED when the stock reaches the preset level. This circuit needs to connect to the server 
to make an alert about the stocks. This stock checker Mobile App reduces the time to verify all the 
stocks in the store. 
Stock monitor: Once the tray is empty or the product count starts reducing, an alert will be sent to the 
supervisor. This can be controlled by a web interface, which also monitors the availability of stocks.  
SMS integration: The stock value will be notified to the supervisor through an SMS API. 



80 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

Cloud deployment: This web application is deployed in a Bluemix cloud environment, which offers a 
broad set of global cloud-based products including computer storage, databases, analytics, 
networking, mobile, developer tools, management tools, IOT, security and enterprise applications. 

 
Figure 11: Architecture Diagram of Inventory CheckerApp 

3.14 Testing Arduino LED 
To build the circuit, a 220-ohm resistor is attached to pin 13. The long leg of an LED is connected to 

the resistor, and the short leg to ground. The Arduino board is plugged into the system, and the Arduino 
program is executed. Most Arduino boards already have an LED attached to pin 13 on the board itself. 
LED blinks to show the reorder level of stock. Figure 12 shows the reorder checking alerts to the 
supervisor by blinking the LED. 

 
Figure 12: Testing Arduino-LED Blink 

4 Results and Discussion 
An Intelligent inventory Checker application is implemented and analyzed with three proximate 

computing entities with various comparison parameters. 

Table 1: Execution time (ms) of computing entities 

Computing Entities Existing Proximate Computing framework using NN Proposed Proximate Computing 

framework using DNN 

Exec 1 Exec 2 Exec 3 Exec 4 Exec 1 Exec 2 Exec 3 Exec 4 

NativeApp 458 346 645 568 455 343 641 566 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 81 
 

Bluemix App 345 243 542 455 342 240 539 453 

Arduino App 312 212 457 356 308 207 454 355 

 

Table 2: Energy consumption (MW) of computing entities 

Computing Entities Existing Proximate Computing framework using NN Proposed Proximate Computing 

framework using DNN 

Exec 1 Exec 2 Exec 3 Exec 4 Exec 1 Exec 2 Exec 3 Exec 4 

NativeApp 410 294 556 524 406 291 551 520 

Bluemix App 305 205 498 405 301 200 495 404 

Arduino App 276 198 402 310 272 194 399 306 

 
Based on the execution time and energy consumption of three computing entities, which are 

shown in Tables 1 and 2, comparison parameters of the three computing entities are depicted in 
Table 3. 

Table 3: Comparison of computing entities 

Parameter Native MobileApp IBM  Bluemix App Arduino 

App 

Execution  Time High Medium Low 

Energy Consumption High Medium Low 

Communication Cost Low Medium Medium 

Computation Cost Low Medium High 

 

Computing Entities
1. Native App

2. Blue mix App
3.  Arduino App

700 1-NN

600 2-NN

3-NN
500

1-DNN
400

2-DNN
300

3-DNN
200

100

0
Exec 1 Exec 2 Exec 3 Exec 4

Computing Entities

 
Figure 13: Execution Time of computing entities 

Execution Time (ms)



82 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

Table 3 depicts the significance of proximate computing entities over the native Mobile App. 
Proximate computation as a service mitigates execution time and energy consumption, thereby 
augmenting the resources of mobile devices. However, the native Mobile App is cost-effective in 
terms of communication and computation. Moreover, no additional hardware or Internet 
connectivity is required for the execution of a native mobile app. The charts in Figures 13 and 14 
show that the native mobile application requires more energy and execution time than the other 
proximate computing entities. Therefore, it is trustworthy to provide computation as a service to 
augment the resources of mobile devices. However, execution of the native mobile application is 
preferred while executing a cost-effective application. 

Computing Entities
1. Native App

2. Blue mix App
3.  Arduino App

600 1-NN

2-NN
500

3-NN
400 1-DNN

300 2-DNN

3-DNN
200

100

0
Exec 1 Exec 2 Exec 3 Exec 4

Computing Entities

 
Figure 14: Energy Consumption of computing entities 

In this proposed framework, both execution time (Exetime) in milliseconds and energy 
consumption (Enecons) in milliwatts are measured in the same method, as shown below. 

For Android Mobile App 

T_Exetime = S_Exetime + M_Exetime      (22) 

T_Enecons = S_Enecons + M_Enecons    (23) 

Where  
T_Exetime = Total Execution Time 
S_Exetime = Execution Time to read the proximity sensor data to the mobile application 
M_Exetime = Execution Time to check reorder level with mobileApp.   

 
For the IBM Bluemix Application 

T_Exetime = N_ Exetime + J_Exetime    (24) 

Energy consumption (mW)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 83 
 

T_Enecons = N_ Enecons + J_Enecons  (25) 

Where 
T_Exetime = Total Execution Time 
N_Exetime = Execution Time to design and deploy the Node-RED flow system 
J_Exetime = Execution Time to check reorder level with JSON input. 
For Arduino Application 

T_Exetime = S_ Exetime + W_Exetime + C_Exetime     (26) 

T_Enecons = S_ Enecons + W_Enecons + C_Enecons   (27) 

Where 
T_Exetime = Total Execution Time 
S_Exetime = Execution Time to read sensor data            
W_Exetime = Execution Time for web interface  
C_Exetime = Cloud Deployment time 

Table 4: Total Energy consumption (mw) when offloading with and without optimization in selected 
computing entities 

Computing Entities Offloading Offloading with NN Offloading with DNN 

NativeApp 621 553 524 

Bluemix App 480 431 405 

Arduino App 364 324 310 

 

Native App Bluemix App Arduino App

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
offloading offloading with NN offloading with

DNN
 

Figure 15: Total Energy Consumption when offloading with and without optimization in selected computing 
entities 

Total energy consumption(mW)



84 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

The total energy consumption when offloading with and without optimization in selected 
computing entities was analyzed in fig.15. It concludes that the proposed offloading with the DNN 
computing framework consumes less power compared to the existing offloading with the NN 
computing framework. 

Native App Bluemix App Arduino App

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55

50
20 30 40

No.of .Tasks

 
Figure 16: Percentage saving in Total Energy Consumption while increasing the no. of tasks in selected 

computing entities 

Fig. 16 shows the Percentage saving in Total Energy Consumption while increasing the no. of 
tasks in selected computing entities. It concludes that the Arduino App has more Percentage saving 
in the range of 94.56%, while increasing the number of tasks (40) as compare to the Bluemix App has 
less Percentage saving in the range of 91.75% and the Native App has less Percentage saving in the 
range of 88%. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
Mobile cloud computing has emerged as a software-level solution to augment the computing 

power of resource-scarce mobile devices. The open issues like Energy consumption, cost model, 
service quality assurance, security, and standardized architecture need to be dealt with as prime 
considerations for the further success of mobile cloud computing. The proposed framework is to 
utilize a centralized broker-node to perform task scheduling for the resource augmentation of a large 
number of mobile devices. The task scheduler model focused on bat optimization-based Resource 
Optimizer was proposed which optimizes the resource constraints of mobile devices. This work also 
proposed a novel offloading algorithm called Deep Neural Network (DNN), which performed as many 
tasks as possible in the cloud when the network transmission bandwidth is high, thereby improving 
the total execution time of all tasks and minimizing the energy use of the mobile device. In this work, 
the proximate computing entities are used to augment the resources of the mobile device. In this 
research work, Arduino and Edge Cloud services provide computation as a service to augment the 
processing time and energy consumption of the mobile device. An intelligent inventory checker 
mobile application based on the proposed framework depicts significant mitigation in execution time 
and energy consumption of mobile devices. This proposed model is evaluated under two different 
resource augmentation environments for mobile cloud computing: More precisely, the task 

Percentage saving in 
energy consumption 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 85 
 

scheduling problem is optimally solved to minimize: (i) the total energy consumption and (ii) the 
execution time. In future enhancements, like a power bank, a processor bank will be implemented as 
a part of computation as a service to augment the resources of mobile devices. Also, there is a plan to 
implement IoT-based MNO cloud services by exploiting fog computing. The cost estimator module of 
the proposed system will be implemented by applying bidding schemes. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: M. Nalini; supervision and writing—review and 
editing: Sivakumar Vengusamy. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the 
manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Dimou A, Iliopoulos C, Polytidou E, Dhurandher SK, Papadimitriou G, Nicopolitidis P. A comprehensive 

review on edge computing: Focusing on mobile users. Advances in Computing, Informatics, Networking 
and Cybersecurity: A Book Honoring Professor Mohammad S. Obaidat’s Significant Scientific Contributions. 
2022:121-52. 

2. Noor TH, Zeadally S, Alfazi A, Sheng QZ. Mobile cloud computing: Challenges and future research directions. 
J Netw Comput Appl. 2018;115:70-85. 

3. Peñalvo FJ, Sharma A, Chhabra A, Singh SK, Kumar S, Arya V, Gaurav A. Mobile cloud computing and 
sustainable development: Opportunities, challenges, and future directions. Int J Cloud Appl Comput. 
2022;12(1):1-20. 

4. Shah Z, Javed U, Naeem M, Zeadally S, Ejaz W. Mobile edge computing (MEC)-enabled UAV placement and 
computation efficiency maximization in disaster scenario. IEEE Trans Veh Technol. 2023;72(10):13406-
16. 

5. Thabet S, Ateya AA, Abo-Zahhad M. Mobile edge computing-based radio access network for tactile internet. 
In 2021 9th International Japan-Africa Conference on Electronics, Communications, and Computations 
(JAC-ECC), 2021 Dec 13, Alexandria, Egypt, 2021, p. 119-124. 

6. Zhu M, Gao S, Tu G, Chen D. Multi-access edge computing (MEC) based on MIMO: A survey. Sensors. 
2023;23(8):3883. 

7. Haibeh LA, Yagoub MC, Jarray A. A survey on mobile edge computing infrastructure: Design, resource 
management, and optimization approaches. IEEE Access. 2022;10:27591-610. 

8. Chen X, Li M, Zhong H, Chen X, Ma Y, Hsu CH. FUNOff: Offloading applications at function granularity for 
mobile edge computing. IEEE Trans Mob Comput. 2023;23(2):1717-34. 

9. Hosseinpour M, Moghaddam MH. Quality-of-experience-aware computation offloading in MEC-enabled 
blockchain-based IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things J. 2023;11(8):14483-93. 

10. Kovachev D, Yu T, Klamma R. Adaptive computation offloading from mobile devices into the cloud. In 2012 
IEEE 10th International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing with Applications, 2012 Jul 10, 
Leganes, Spain, 2012, p. 784-791. 

11. Kemp R, Palmer N, Kielmann T, Bal H. Cuckoo: a computation offloading framework for smartphones. In 
International Conference on Mobile Computing, Applications, and Services, 2010 Oct 25, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2010, p. 59-79. 

12. Orsini G, Bade D, Lamersdorf W. CloudAware: empowering context‐aware self‐adaptation for mobile 
applications. Trans Emerg Telecommun Technol. 2018;29(4):e3210. 

13. Quoc PC, Nguyen XQ, Thinh TN. Towards an FPGA-targeted hardware/software co-design framework for 
CNN-based edge computing. Mob Netw Appl. 2022;27(5):2024-35. 

14. Shiraz M, Gani A, Shamim A, Khan S, Ahmad RW. Energy efficient computational offloading framework for 
mobile cloud computing. J Grid Comput. 2015;13(1):1-8. 



86 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):5 
 

15. Deng Y, Chen Z, Yao X, Hassan S, Ibrahim AM. Parallel offloading in green and sustainable mobile edge 
computing for delay-constrained IoT system. IEEE Trans Veh Technol. 2019;68(12):12202-14. 

16. Shiraz M, Gani A. A lightweight active service migration framework for computational offloading in mobile 
cloud computing. J Supercomput. 2014;68(2):978-95. 

17. Kumar J, Malik A. Contextual Computation Augmentation in Mobile Cloud Computing. Int J Adv Res Comput 
Sci. 2018;9(2):65. 

18. Nir M, Matrawy A, St-Hilaire M. Economic and energy considerations for resource augmentation in mobile 
cloud computing. IEEE Trans Cloud Comput. 2015;6(1):99-113. 

19. Zhou B, Dastjerdi AV, Calheiros RN, Srirama SN, Buyya R. mCloud: A context-aware offloading framework 
for heterogeneous mobile cloud. IEEE Trans Serv Comput. 2015;10(5):797-810. 

20. Dong Z, Liu Y, Zhou H, Xiao X, Gu Y, Zhang L, Liu C. An energy-efficient offloading framework with 
predictable temporal correctness. In Proceedings of the Second ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing, 
2017 Oct 12, New York, NY, USA, 2017, p. 1-12. 

21. Dou A, Kalogeraki V, Gunopulos D, Mielikainen T, Tuulos VH. Misco: a mapreduce framework for mobile 
systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on pervasive technologies related to assistive 
environments, 2010 Jun 23, New York, NY, USA, 2010, p. 1-8. 

22. Elgazzar K, Martin P, Hassanein HS. Cloud-assisted computation offloading to support mobile services. IEEE 
Trans Cloud Comput. 2014;4(3):279-92. 

23. Gonzalez M, López-Espín JJ, Aparicio J, Talbi EG. A hyper-matheuristic approach for solving mixed integer 
linear optimization models in the context of data envelopment analysis. PeerJ Comput Sci. 2022;8:e828. 

24. Chen X, Li M, Zhong H, Ma Y, Hsu CH. DNNOff: Offloading DNN-based intelligent IoT applications in mobile 
edge computing. IEEE Trans Ind Inform. 2021;18(4):2820-9. 

25. Cil AE, Yildiz K, Buldu A. Detection of DDoS attacks with feed forward based deep neural network model. 
Expert Syst Appl. 2021;169:114520. 

26. Yang XS, Hossein Gandomi A. Bat algorithm: a novel approach for global engineering optimization. Eng 
Comput. 2012;29(5):464-83.