ARTICLE 

Optimized Sequence Recognition Framework for Memory-Assisted 
Threat Mitigation in Wireless Intrusion Environments 

K. Padmavathi1,* and Basheer Riskhan2 

1Associate Professor, Department of Computer Science, PSG College of Arts & Science, Coimbatore, India. 
2Dean and Associate Professor, School of Computing and Informatics, Albukhary International University, Malaysia. 
*Corresponding Author: K. Padmavathi. Email: padmasakthivel@gmail.com  

Received: 09 June 2024; Accepted: 20 September 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: In order to achieve high security in the networking domain are considered in current scenarios, 
various methods have been proposed based on software for pattern matching. But Approaches that are based 
on software do not provide adequate scalability and reconfigurability to today’s level of security provisioning. 
To give enough security in a Wireless Intrusion Detection System, this project work moves towards the 
hardware-based approaches. It provides a high level of security. Hardware-based approaches mainly 
concentrate on memory efficiency in pattern matching. In this project work, a new algorithm was proposed 
based on hardware approaches, which provides an efficient memory for pattern matching. The state traversal 
pattern matching algorithm provides a significant reduction in the memory used when compared with that of 
the conventional Aho-Corasick algorithm. This new algorithm produces memory reduction through a new 
design methodology, which constructs the state traversal machine with a size of 1280bytes. Within 1280 bytes, 
the users can store large-sized string patterns in the pattern database and easily retrieve them from the 
database using the state traversal machine through the path vector. The previous algorithms need a huge 
amount of memory compared to the conventional Aho–Corasick algorithm and bit split algorithm. In addition, 
the number of basic ASCII characters is 128. We can design the memory architecture using a Binary Search Tree 
(BST) structure. Each node required 10 bytes of memory space. So, it is needed a very few amounts of memory 
space is needed, such as 128(ASCII character) X10 is 1280 bytes. Our hardware generates the address of input 
strings, and all the common addresses of input strings are merged by the state traversal machine and the bits 
split algorithms. The merged addresses of input strings are encrypted and decrypted by the Blowfish algorithm 
to allow the valid packets or discard the invalid packets using Wireless and Detection Systems (WIDS). 

KEYWORDS: WIDS, Pattern Matching, Binary Search Tree, AC Algorithm, and Finite Automata. 
   

1 Introduction 
Intrusion detection is an approach to security that is also evolving towards networked 

environments. Initially, Intrusion detection is a technique for unearthing masqueraders and 
misfeasors in standalone systems; later, it is slowly shifted towards networks. In a networked 
systems environment Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is the common source that protects the 
systems from attack or malicious perversion [1]. The IDS development and distribution are exhibited 
in terms of equipment, protocols, connectivity, cost, and automation. This is highly evident in 
Wireless Intrusion Detection Systems (WIDS), which hold many chances and challenges connected 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



88 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

with data transmission through an open, mutually shared medium. The operation of a WIDS is a 
multistep process from the origination of an attack through to human human-readable assessment. 
If an optimum solution is needed, then a precise consideration has to be provided to each process in 
the chain from attack detection. In recent days, research has focused on each discrete facet of a WIDS 
with trivial consideration of the entire system operation. In recent days, research has focused on each 
discrete facet of a WIDS with trivial consideration of the entire system operation. Taking a holistic 
view of the technology shows the interconnectivity and inter-dependence between stages, leading to 
improvements and novel research areas for investigation [2]. This chapter will outline the general 
structure of Wireless Intrusion Detection Systems and briefly describe the functions of each 
improvement stage, categorized into the following six areas: Architecture, Threat Identification, 
Intrusion Detection, Data Collection, Alert Correlation, Evaluation. These substances are considered 
crucial topics for beginners. Attention will be placed on developing WIDS' future stages by supporting 
the readers to be aware of the impact made at the initial stages. WIDS is a wider concept than catching 
break-in attempts. It also includes verifying the access points that are on the network, identifying any 
that should not be there or have security issues, and detecting attacks on access points or clients [3]. 

Encryption is the method by which the plain text is converted into something that seems to be a 
meaningless and random subject. Decryption is the method that changes the ciphertext generated 
through encryption back to the original text. Symmetric encryption is the process of encrypting a 
large quantity of data. In order to decrypt the data, the same key that was used for its encryption is 
to be used. The primary objective of encryption is to hide the original text and meaning behind 
something that seems meaningless by making the key a mandate to decrypt the same. The challenge 
is to develop an encrypted text that has no or a very minimal chance of being decrypted without the 
key [4]. An encryption is termed as good when there is no other option other than trying all the 
possible keys in order to decrypt the same. For such encryptions, the longer the key, the larger the 
number of possible keys that need to be tried to decrypt. The quality of encryption is a very important 
task to be considered, as even the strongest algorithm can be broken with a strong attacking method. 
One needs to be very careful in selecting an encryption standard, and mostly an algorithm that has a 
longer life and high resistance towards attacks to be chosen. In this memory architecture, the string 
patterns are taken as input, which is compiled by a finite state machine; as a result, substrings that 
match to string patterns are detected. Then that particular string pattern transition table is stored in 
memory [5]. 

 
Figure 1: DFA for matching “abcd” and “ebcf” 

Fig. 1 depicts the state transition diagram that accepts the input strings “abcd” & “ebcf”. States 7 
and 8 are final states or accepting states for the input string “abcd” & “ebcf”. Two strings abcd, ebcf 
have having common string ‘bc’. For character ‘b’, two similar transition states 3 & 4 are there in FSM, 
and for character ‘c’ also two similar transition states 5 & 6 are there in FSM. So, it leads to an 
increasing number of states, in other words, memory. In order to achieve the reduction of memory 
size, the two states are combined, i.e., 34 is the accepting state of character ‘b’ & 56 is the accepting 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 89 
 

state of character ‘c’. In this study, combining similar states is done using by linked list data structure. 
The algorithm used to reduce FSM states and memory size is the Merged List. Fig.2 shows the 
memory architecture used to instrument the finite state machine. In the presented architecture, the 
current state and an input character are collected in the Memory Address Register (MAR). This 
memory address represents the memory location of that particular input character. In this, with the 
use of match vector information, the string matching is found. The match vector value is zero 
represents that no substrings are matched. Otherwise, the match vector has a value. For example, an 
input character is f, and the current state is 6. In this case next state is 8, and the match vector is 2 
because “ecdf” is matched [6]. 

 
Figure 2: Basic memory architecture 

In order to achieve high network security, Networks should use an IDS. Through Memory 
architecture, scalability and reconfigurability are achieved in IDS. In this study, a novel algorithm 
based on hardware approaches, which provides an efficient memory for pattern matching by 
decreasing the FSM states than the Original FSM states. Comparing the classic Aho-Corasick 
algorithm, the state traversal pattern matching algorithm provides 21% of memory reduction. In 
addition, this provides 24% of memory reduction when combined with the bit-split algorithm. Our 
new algorithm produced to requires a very small amount of memory compared to the traditional 
Aho-Corasick algorithm. It does not provide security in previous algorithms, including the Aco-
Corasick algorithm and the bits split algorithm. We propose both aspects, such as memory reduction 
as well as data security. 

2 Related Works 
This section briefs the research works associated with this project. In recent research number 

of algorithms based on hardware approaches have been proposed. Generally, hardware approaches 
are based on logic and memory architectures. The hardware-oriented approaches are subdivided 
into a couple of architectures based on the memory and logic. The architecture that is based on logic 
is operated in logical resources by on-chip in a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) that is 
subjected to making changes in the pattern of regular expression on a state machine that are parallel 
or through circuits, since the FPGA has the drawback of allowing fresh patterns of attacks. Idhu et al. 
[7] have developed an algorithm in order to compile the patterns of regular expressions into a form 
of circuits that are combined based on a nondeterministic finite automaton (NFA). Hutchings et al. 
[8] proposed a module generator that can employ the prefixes that are common to reduce the area of 
the circuit in an FPGA. Moscola et al. [9] introduced a module that is based on the scanning of the 
content that is applied on a firewall of an internet service with the aid of an FPGA. Clark et al. [10] put 
to developed an area and the throughput with the inclusion of pre-coded inputs that are wide and 
parallel to the conventional NFA applications. Baker et al. [11] introduced a pre-decoded multiple-
pipeline shift-and-compare matcher by changing incoming characters into many bit lines, which 
minimized the routing complexity and comparator size. Lin et al. [12] designed a sharing architecture 
with the motive of reducing circuit areas by employing common infix and suffix sub-patterns. 

According to re-configurability and scalability, memory architectures are highly focused because 
memory is flexible and scalable. In the context of matching multiple patterns, the Aho–Corasick (AC) 
algorithm [13] is highly suitable and a popular algorithm. Aldwairi et al. [14] suggested a configurable 



90 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

string-matching accelerator by employing a memory implementation of the AC FSM. Tan et al. [15] 
designed an algorithm called the bit-split algorithm for partitioning a large AC state machine into 
small state machines with the motive of minimizing the memory needs. Jung et al. [16] proposed an 
architecture by utilizing an FPGA implementation of the bit-split string matching. Piyachon et al. [17] 
designed a machine intending to reduce the memory size by relabeling states of the AC state machine. 
Piyachon et al. [18] planned a method by employing Label Transition Table and CAM-based Lookup 
Table to significantly reduce the memory size. Cho et al. [19], [20] methodized a processor that is 
used to store the list of substrings and the state transitions based on hash-based pattern matching. 
Dharmapurikar et al. [21] designed an algorithm for pattern matching, which is used to consider 
multiple characters at a time by utilizing the modified AC algorithm. Likewise, the content-
addressable memories (CAM) are also broadly used for string matching, since they match the entire 
pattern at a time when the pattern is shifted past the CAM. Gokhale et al. [22] utilized the CAM to 
execute a parallel search at a high speed. Sourdis et al. [23] employed the pre-decoded technique for 
the CAM-based pattern matching to minimize the area. Also, Yu et al. [24] designed a pattern-
matching called ternary content-addressable memory (TCAM)-based multiple-pattern matching, 
which could manage complex patterns, correlated patterns, and patterns with negation. The hash-
based approach is methodized to employ a Bloom filter for deep packet inspection. Dharmapurikar 
et al. [25] planned a mechanism by employing the parallel bloom filters called a hashing-table lookup 
mechanism to allow a large number of fixed-length strings for hardware scanning. Lockwood et al. 
[26] suggested a smart gateway grounded on a Bloom filter that facilitates Internet worm and virus 
protection in both wide area networks (WAN) and local area networks (LAN). 

3 Proposed Methodology 
The most popular and widely used algorithm for multiple string matching is the Aho–Corasick 

(AC) algorithm. The AC algorithm minimizes the number of states in the FSM. This algorithm utilizes 
a Finite State Machine. Dotted lines are represented for failure transition, and solid lines are 
represented for valid transition in the AC algorithm. In the AC algorithm, valid transitions are 
represented by solid lines, and Failure transitions are represented by dotted lines. This algorithm is 
achieved by the Match vector. The AC machine checks the valid transition for the input character. 
Suppose not valid, then the state machine represents a failure transition. Otherwise, take another 
input character to check valid character or not. In Fig. 3, the AC Machine is in State 0, in this machine 
accepts “study” & “crude”. For the input character s’ AC Machine moved to state 1. For the input 
character ‘c’ AC Machine moved to state 6. From State1, the input character ‘t’ is taken, then moved 
to state 2otherwise moved to state 0. In this process, the same input character is processed many 
times from state 0. 

 
Figure 3: State diagram of an AC machine 

In Fig.3, the double circle nodes indicate the accepting state. For the string “study”, the AC state 
table stores the match vector {10} & accepting state 5. For the string “crude”, the AC state table stores 
the match vector {01}. Match vector {10} & {01} represents the accepting state/ final state. Match 
vector {00} is not an accepting state. So, the AC algorithm is compiled & stores the same substrings 
many times. So, to achieve the speed and reduce memory to store substrings, in the AC algorithm 
same substrings that are repeatedly compiled and stored should be eliminated. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 91 
 

 
Figure 4: AC state table 

A state traversal pattern matching algorithm substantially lessens the memory needs by creating 
a memory-efficient pattern-matching algorithm. This algorithm captures 21% of memory reduction 
when compared with the classical Aho–Corasick algorithm. This state traversal pattern matching 
algorithm is used to increase the throughput of the network & increase the security of the data in the 
Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS). So that new algorithm should beat this state traversal 
pattern matching algorithm by reducing the memory for exact string patterns. 

 
Figure 5: A state traversal pattern matching algorithm 

The state traversal machine comprises: 1) the construction of valid transition, failure transition, 
pathVec, and ifFinal functions, and 2) merging pseudo-equivalent states. The states 0 to 6 match the 
first pattern “artier”. Hence, all states of pathVec are set to 001, and to notify the final state (path 
terminates), the ifFinal of state 6 is set to 1. Since there is an edge labeled  from state 0 to state 1, 
when a pattern called “artist” is added to the graph, the edge is reused. The pathVec of other states, 
such as state 7, state 8, state 9, state 10, state 11, on the path is set to 010, and the pathVec of states 
0 and 1 is set to 011. To indicate the final state for the second pattern, the ifFinal of state 11 is set to 
1. Likewise, when the third pattern(“artily”) is appended to the graph, the pathVec of states (0,1) is 
set to 111. The other pathVec states, which are state 12, state 13, state 14, state 15, and state 16 on 
the path, are set to 100. The third pattern final state (ifFinal of state 16) is set to 1. Further, the Ac 



92 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

algorithm abstracts and combines the pseudo-equivalent states. Merging pseudo equivalent states 
comprises merging the failure transitions and performing the union on the pathVec of the merged 
states. This algorithm has some demerits. In order to store the 3 strings, this algorithm wants a 3-bit 
path vector for each string. Suppose for storing n strings, this algorithm wants n bits of length path 
vector for each string. So the path vector combinations want a separate memory space. In order to 
reduce those problems, this new algorithm builds a new memory architecture. Through that, memory 
efficiency is achieved. 

3.1 Our New Hardware Memory Generator 
In order to achieve the speed & reduce the memory to store the string, in the AC algorithm same 

substrings that are repeatedly compiled and stored should be eliminated. To avoid that, much 
research has been completed. From that, memory efficiency is achieved, but not enough for today’s 
networking. In this study, discuss about to give more memory efficiency through a new algorithm. In 
this new algorithm, a new state traversal machine is implemented. Normally string has only letters. 
Each character wants only one byte to store in memory. This new design methodology only stores 
the 26 alphabets. Each character is connected with all the other characters using of linked list. 

In this work, a new algorithm was proposed based on hardware approaches, which provides an 
efficient memory for pattern matching. Already State traversal pattern matching algorithm supplies 
memory reduction when compared with the classic Aho-Corasick algorithm. This new algorithm 
produces memory reduction through a new design methodology, which constructs the State traversal 
machine with a size of 128 characters are requiring 128X10 bytes. Each character node requires 10 
bytes of memory space. Totally, we designed the memory hardware size to be 1280 bytes. The 
memory hardware is generating the address of the user's input strings. 

 
Figure 6: Alphabetically Order with Memory Address Generator 

The main thing in this project work is the construction of a state traversal machine. This tree 
contains characters from character ‘A’ to ‘Z’, a total of 26 characters is stored. The character ‘M ‘is 
assigned as the root node. The smaller than character ‘M’is arranged in the left sub-tree. The greater 
than character ‘M’ is arranged in the right sub-tree. The memory hardware generates the address of 
input strings. Suppose the input string is “EGJL” and the memory hardware generates the addresses 
of the equivalent input string are 2092, 2102, 2112, and 2122. Here memory address of character ‘E’ 
is 2092, character ‘G’ is 2102, character ‘J’ is 2112, and character ‘L’ is 2122. Each node requires 10 
bytes of memory space. In this, addresses are collected and construct the finite state traversal 
machine (FSM). 

3.2 Formation of New State Traversal Machine 
This module is used to construct a state traversal machine that contains the address of input 

strings. Suppose the two input strings such as “WXYZ” and “PXYQ”. The address of the input string 
“WXYZ” is address 2152 for the character ‘W’, address 2242 for the character ‘X’, address 2192 for 
the character ‘Y’, and address 2252 for the character ‘Z’. Similarly, the address of the input string 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 93 
 

“PXYQ” is address 2142 for the character ’P’, address 2242 for the character ’X’, address 2192 for the 
character ‘Y’, and address 2212 for the character ‘Q’. The traversal machine is creating two paths. 
First path binary number starts with “01_0” where the first two bits are Path_Vector and the last bit 
indicates the start or middle, or last state. Similar to the second path binary number starts with 
“10_0”. Final state is set the bit as in the first path is 01_1. Others are set as bit is 01_0. 

 
Figure 7: State Traversal Machine 

Both strings “WXYZ” and “PXYZ” have the common characters ‘X’ and ‘Y’. The input character 
‘X’ address (2242) transitions from state 1 to 2. Similarly, the input character ‘X’ address transitions 
from state 5 to 6. States 2 and 6 are merged by using the merged Finite State Machine algorithm. 
Similarly, the input character ‘Y’ is present in both strings. So, the states 3 and 7 are merged. After 
merging the input characters ‘X’ and ‘Y’. 

 
Figure 8: Merged State Traversal Machine 

This is an important process in this research. Because with the use of this module, only the memory 
will be reduced to extract the string patterns. In this module, similar states of different strings are merged 
to achieve memory efficiency. Normally, all characters of a string are stored in separate locations, which 
leads to an increase the memory as well as an increase in finite state machine size. This architecture 
reduces the memory for a string and reduces the FSM size. 

Pseudo-equivalent states –definition: If two states are said to be pseudo-equivalent states, they have 
different next states, but alike transitions, same failure transitions, and same ifFinal bit. 

In Fig. 7, since the 2nd and 6th states consist of the same input transitions, same failure transitions to 
0th, and same ifFinal bit 0, they are said to be pseudo-equivalent states. Also, the 3rd and 7th states are in 
the same situation. In the algorithm, the pseudo-equivalent states 2 and 6 are combined to be state 26, 
and states 3 and 7 are combined to be state 37, as shown in Fig. 8. The pathVec_ifFinal of the merged states 
are used to updated by taking the union of the pathVec_ifFinal. For this reason, the pathVec_ifFinal of 
states 26 and 37 are changed to be {11_0}. Further, a register is needed called preReg, to track the 
precedent pathVec in every state. The width of preReg and pathVec is equal. Every bit of the preReg 
corresponds to a string pattern. By performing a bitwise AND operation, the preReg is updated in each 
state on the pathVec of the next state and its current value. All the merged states can be differentiated by 
tracking the preceding path entering into the merged state. The value of the preReg displays the match 
vector of the matched pattern while reaching the final vector. The machine reaches the failure mode and 
selects the failure transition as in the AC algorithm, during the state traversal, and if all the bits of the 
preReg become 0. Thereafter, any failure transition, all the bits of the preReg are reset to 1. 



94 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

 
Figure 9: Transition function of string “wxyz” 

Consider an example in Fig. 9 where the string “pcdf” is applied. Firstly, the preReg is initialized to 
. After taking the input character ‘w’ in state 0, the merg_FSM reaches state 5 and updates the 

preReg by executing a bitwise AND operation on the pathVec {10} of state 5 and the current preReg {11}. 
The resulting new value of the preReg will be . Next, by taking the input 
character ‘x’ , the merge_FSM reaches the state 26 and updates the preReg by doing a bitwise AND 
operation on the pathVec {11} of state 26 and the current preReg {10}. The preReg maintains 

. Next, by taking the input character ’y’, the merg_FSM reaches state 37 and updates the 
preReg by doing a bitwise AND operation on the pathVec {11} of state 37 and the current preReg {10}. 
The preReg remains  .Lastly, the merg_FSM goes to state 4 after getting the 
input character ‘z’. Then the preReg becomes a, after performing a bitwise AND 
operation on the pathVec {01} of state 4 and the current preReg {10}. As per the algorithm, the machine 
will go to the failure mode if all the bits of the preReg become 0 during the state traversal. 

 
Figure 10: Transition function of string “pxyq” 

Likewise, consider another example in Fig. 10 where the string “pxyq” is employed. The process of 
state traversal is the same as the previous example, as for as the state machine reaches state 37 and the 
input character is ‘q’. Then, by taking the input character ‘q’, the merg_FSM reaches state 8, and the preReg 
becomes  by doing a bitwise AND operation on the pathVec {10} of state 8 and the current 
preReg {10}. Since the value of ifFinal is 1, the value of preReg, , indicates that the pattern  
is matched. 

 
Figure 11: Algorithm for State Traversal Pattern Matching 

In Figure 12, similar states of strings “abcdef”, “apcdeg”, and “awcdeh” are merged. The ‘cde’ 
substring is common for all three strings. So, these three states of different strings are merged. In the 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 95 
 

above figure, for the common substring ‘c’, the states 3,8,13 are merged. For the common substring 
‘d’, the states 4,9,14 are merged. For the common substring ‘e’, the states 5,10,15 are merged. 
Normally, each character occupies 1byte of space in memory. In this example, for storing these 3 
strings, the ‘d’ character wants 3 bytes. After merging all the strings, only 1byte of memory space is 
enough for the character ‘d’. All three strings access the same memory space to access the character 
‘d’ with the help of FSM or memory architecture. So, it will be useful for reducing memory for storing 
and extracting the string. As a result, all the strings are using common memory for substrings in a 
new state traversal machine. This is also one of the methods to reduce the memory. 

 
Figure 12: Merging the similar states 

3.3 Loop Back in Merged States 
In a state machine, some cases of multiple sections of pseudo-equivalent states are combined, and 

this may create a loop-back problem. The loopback problem is due to combining common sub-patterns 
with dissimilar sequences. For instance, consider the two patterns, “pqrstu” and “wstqrv” have the 
common sub-pattern, “qr” and “st”, exhibited in different sequences. The corresponding state machine is 
shown in Figure a. Since the common sub-patterns, “qr”, in the 2nd state, 2, and 10th state, 3rd and 11th 
States are illustratively equivalent. The sub-patterns, “st”, the 4th and 8th states, 5th and 9th states are also 
illustrative equivalents.  

Figure b depicts the loop-back transition from the 5th to the 2nd state. The loop transition may cause 
results that match as false positives. For instance, the input string “aqrstqrstu” will be flawed as the 
pattern “pqrstu”. Loop back transitions will not occur as long as the common substrings appear in 
sequence while merging the corresponding pseudo-equivalent states. That is, the pseudo-equivalent 
states can be combined without loop-back issues if the common sub-patterns appear in sequence. As a 
result, in the program, the order of common sub-patterns is recorded and identified.    

 
Figure 13: Algorithm for extracting substrings 



96 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

 
Figure 13a: Corresponding state machine 

 

 
Figure 13b: The loop-back transition 

Fig. b depicts the pseudo code of the algorithm to detect the common substring without loopback 
issues. Primarily, by employing the longest substring algorithm, common substrings are extracted. 
The execution results will report all the possible common substrings. Then, all the sequences of 
common substrings are labeled as a new sequence. Next, the longest common subsequence (LCS) 
algorithm is utilized to detect all the common string’s longest subsequence. The outcome of LCS 
ensures zero loop backing in transitions. For instance, let the two substrings pattern can be extracted, 
“nopqrstuvwxyz” and “nopabqrstuvcdxyz”.  

By employing the longest common substring algorithm, all the common substrings can be 
extracted, which are “nop”, “qrs”, “tuv”, and “xyz”. Then, we label the substrings “nop”, “qrs”, “tuv”, 
and “xyz” as , , , and , respectively. Therefore, the sequence of substrings in “nopqrstuvwxyz” 
is labeled as “ ” while the sequence of substrings in “nopabqrstuvcdxyz” is labeled as “ ”. Next, 
the LCS algorithm is utilized in order to find all the longest common subsequences in between the 
two new sequences, “ ” and “ ”, and the outcomes are “ ” or “ ”.Hence, the subsequence 

(“nop”), (“tuv”), and (“xyz”) or the subsequences of (“nop”), (“qrs”), and (“xyz”) can be 
combined without loop-back issues. Notice that the outcome of LCS has a non-unique nature. In 
Section IX, we will define a gain function to select subsequences to be combined.  

3.4 Encrypt and Decrypt Merged data using Blowfish algorithm 
By employing the blowfish algorithm, the input strings are merged. Since the Blowfish algorithm is a 

symmetric encryption algorithm, it uses the same secret key to both encrypt and decrypt messages. It is 
also known as a block cipher algorithm, as it splits a message into fixed-length blocks during encryption 
and decryption. The block length for Blowfish is 64 bits. Encryption is a security method that allows only 
an authorized person to read the message. In order to achieve encryption, an encryption algorithm is 
employed to produce ciphertext. The encrypted messages can be read only if they are decrypted. Figure. 
14 is an encryption algorithm that generates ciphertext. Figure. 15 is a decryption algorithm that 
generates actual text. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 97 
 

 
Figure 14: Encryption using the Blowfish Algorithm 

 
Figure 15: Decryption using the Blowfish Algorithm 



98 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

 
Figure 16: System Architecture 

4 Experimental Results 
The 2217 patterns of strings that hold 36539 number of characters are obtained from the 

database of all the rules in the version 2.4 of Snort set. The experiments are carried out with the AC 
algorithm first and then the bit-split. The flow in which the process takes place is depicted in Figure 
17. During the early stages, the patterns are obtained from the aforesaid database. In the stage that 
follows, the patterns that belong to the 32 strings are segmented into a module that is based on the 
pattern similarity. In the subsequent stage, the LCS is used to obtain all the substrings, eliminating 
the issues that may occur due to the loopback. As there is non-uniqueness in the results obtained, the 
substrings that are common and that have the biggest sharing gain are considered and selected. The 
former is defined as the length of substrings that are in common multiplied by the number of patterns 
that share the substrings that are in common. For example, consider three patterns, “1common1”, 
“2common2”, and “3common3”, and they are identified to have the word “common” as a substring 
that is common to all three. The sharing gain will be  since the substring “common” has 6 
characters that are shared among the three patterns. In the final stage, the common substrings are 
obtained are subjected to merging, and the transition table is generated. 

 The experimental results of the integration of the algorithm into the AC algorithm are shown in 
Figure 18. The name of the rule set is exhibited in Column 1, Column 2, and Column 3 of the Table. 
The number of state transitions, the number of states, and the memory size of the AC algorithm are 
expressed in Columns four, five, and six. The results of the approach are depicted in columns seven, 
eight, and nine. The tenth column indicates that there is a memory reduction than that of the AC 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 99 
 

algorithm. Column eleven is our new algorithm with a merged finite state machine, as shown in the 
Figure 19. Table. Rules set Oracle the count of patterns 337, the count of characters 11128, the count 
of transitions 6793, the count of states is 6804, and the required memory in bytes is 49267. But the 
AC algorithm requires the memory size in bytes of 30699. But our algorithm counts the number of 
characters available in the patterns. Only 49 letters and special symbols are available. So it allocates 
490 bytes of memory space. Similarly, Deleted allocates 780 bytes, Exploit allocates 560 bytes, Web-
misc allocates 740 bytes, Smtp allocates 1120 bytes, Misc allocates 920 bytes, Ftp allocates 900 bytes, 
and other rule sets allocate 1180 bytes. The average memory requirement is 4% of AC and other 
algorithms. So, total memory reduction is 96% of other algorithms. 

 

 

 



100 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

 

Figure 17: Process flow 

 
Figure 18: Results Table of AC algorithm 

 
Figure 19: Results of the AC Algorithm 

5 Conclusion and Future Enhancement 
In this study, a pattern-matching technique that is more efficient in terms of memory usage is 

introduced. The proposed technique can considerably minimize the number of states and transitions 
by merging the states that are pseudo-equivalent during an attack. To add on, the presented work is 
complementary in nature to that of other approaches that focus on minimizing memory usage. The 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 101 
 

WIDS is very useful for encrypting and decrypting the merged pattern-matching strings. It provides 
security against unauthorized attack. The future work focuses on constructing a B or B+ tree, which 
can further help in improving the memory usage by minimizing the memory address of the strings 
taken for input.  

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: K. Padmavathi; supervision and writing—
review and editing: Basheer Riskhan. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version 
of the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Singh R, Kumar H, Singla RK, Ketti RR. Internet attacks and intrusion detection system: A review of the 

literature. Online Inf Rev. 2017;41(2):171-84. 
2. Satam P, Hariri S. WIDS: An anomaly-based intrusion detection system for Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11) protocol. 

IEEE Trans Netw Serv Manag. 2020;18(1):1077-91. 
3. Ozkan-Okay M, Samet R, Aslan Ö, Gupta D. A comprehensive systematic literature review on intrusion 

detection systems. IEEE Access. 2021;9:157727-60. 
4. Alenezi MN, Alabdulrazzaq H, Mohammad NQ. Symmetric encryption algorithms: Review and evaluation 

study. Int J Commun Netw Inf Secur. 2020;12(2):256-72. 
5. Poh GS, Chin JJ, Yau WC, Choo KK, Mohamad MS. Searchable symmetric encryption: Designs and challenges. 

ACM Comput Surv. 2017;50(3):1-37. 
6. Barenghi A, Breveglieri L, Izzo N, Pelosi G. Exploring cortex-M microarchitectural side channel information 

leakage. IEEE Access. 2021;9:156507-27. 
7. Nakahara H, Sasao T, Matsuura M. A regular expression matching circuit based on a decomposed 

automaton. In International Symposium on Applied Reconfigurable Computing, 2011 Mar 23, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2011, p. 16-28. 

8. Hutchings BL, Franklin R, Carver D. Assisting network intrusion detection with reconfigurable hardware. 
In Proceedings of 10th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, 
2002 Apr 24, Napa, CA, USA, 2002, p. 111-120. 

9. Moscola J, Lockwood J, Loui RP, Pachos M. Implementation of a content-scanning module for an internet 
firewall. In 11th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, 2003 Apr 
9, Napa, CA, USA, 2003, p. 31-38. 

10. Clark CR, Schimmel DE. Efficient reconfigurable logic circuits for matching complex network intrusion 
detection patterns. In International conference on field programmable logic and applications, 2003 Sep 1, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, p. 956-959. 

11. Baker ZK, Prasanna VK. High-throughput linked-pattern matching for intrusion detection systems. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM symposium on Architecture for networking and communications systems, 
2005 Oct 26, New York, NY, USA, 2005, p. 193-202. 

12. Lin CH, Huang CT, Jiang CP, Chang SC. Optimization of regular expression pattern matching circuits on 
FPGA. In Proceedings of the Design Automation & Test in Europe Conference, 2006 Mar 6, Munich, 2006, 
p. 1-6. 

13. Pao D, Lin W, Liu B. A memory-efficient pipelined implementation of the aho-corasick string-matching 
algorithm. ACM Trans Archit Code Optim. 2010;7(2):1-27. 

14. Aldwairi M, Conte T, Franzon P. Configurable string-matching hardware for speeding up intrusion 
detection. ACM SIGARCH Comput Arch News. 2005;33(1):99-107. 

15. Tan L, Brotherton B, Sherwood T. Bit-split string-matching engines for intrusion detection and prevention. 
ACM Trans Archit Code Optim. 2006;3(1):3-4. 



102 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):6 
 

16. Jung HJ, Baker ZK, Prasanna VK. Performance of FPGA implementation of bit-split architecture for intrusion 
detection systems. In Proceedings 20th IEEE International Parallel & Distributed Processing Symposium, 
2006 Apr 25, Rhodes, Greece, 2006, p. 8-14. 

17. Piyachon P, Luo Y. Compact state machines for high performance pattern matching. In Proceedings of the 
44th Annual Design Automation Conference, 2007 Jun 4, New York, NY, USA, 2007, p. 493-496. 

18. Piyachon P, Luo Y. Design of high-performance pattern matching engine through compact deterministic 
finite automata. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Design Automation Conference, 2008 Jun 8, New York, 
NY, USA, 2008, p. 852-857. 

19. Cho YH, Mangione-Smith WH. A pattern matching coprocessor for network security. In Proceedings of the 
42nd annual Design Automation Conference, 2005 Jun 13, New York, NY, USA, 2005, p. 234-239. 

20. Cho YH, Mangione-Smith WH. Fast reconfiguring deep packet filter for 1+ gigabit network. In 13th Annual 
IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM'05), 2005 Apr 18, Napa, CA, 
USA, 2005, p. 215-224. 

21. Dharmapurikar S, Lockwood JW. Fast and scalable pattern matching for network intrusion detection 
systems. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun. 2006;24(10):1781-92. 

22. Gokhale V, Kroep K, Rao VS, Verburg J, Yechangunja R. Tixt: An extensible testbed for tactile internet 
communication. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020;3(1):32-7. 

23. Sourdis I, Pnevmatikatos D. Pre-decoded CAMs for efficient and high-speed NIDS pattern matching. In 12th 
Annual IEEE symposium on field-programmable custom computing machines, 2004 Apr 20, Napa, CA, USA, 
2004, p. 258-267. 

24. Yu F, Katz RH, Lakshman TV. Gigabit rate packet pattern-matching using TCAM. In Proceedings of the 12th 
IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols, 2004 Oct 8, Berlin, Germany, 2004, p. 174-183. 

25. Dharmapurikar S, Krishnamurthy P, Sproull T, Lockwood J. Deep packet inspection using parallel bloom 
filters. In11th Symposium on High Performance Interconnects, 2003 Aug 20, Stanford, CA, USA, 2003, p. 
44-51. 

26. Lockwood JW, Moscola J, Kulig M, Reddick D, Brooks T. Internet worm and virus protection in dynamically 
reconfigurable hardware. In Proceedings of the Military and Aerospace Programmable Logic Device 
Conference, 2003 p. 1-8.