ARTICLE 

Reliability-Driven Cloudlet Allocation Framework Leveraging Chaotic 
Evolutionary Techniques for Mobile Cloud Environments 

P. Jayasheelan1,* and Swamynathan Ramakrishnan2 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Data Science, Sri Krishna Adithya College of Arts and Science, India. 
2Amity Business School, Amity University, Dubai. 
*Corresponding Author: P. Jayasheelan. Email: sheelan.jsp@gmail.com  

Received: 25 June 2024; Accepted: 13 September 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: Cloud computing provides cost-efficient opportunities for enterprises by offering a variety of 
dynamic, scalable, and shared services. Usually, cloud providers provide assurances by specifying technical and 
functional descriptions in Service Level Agreements (SLAs) for the services they offer. The descriptions in SLAs 
are not consistent among the cloud providers, even though they offer services with similar functionality. 
Therefore, customers are not sure whether they can identify a trustworthy cloud provider only based on its 
SLA. Propose a Trust-Based Cloudlet Service Selection (TCSS) system architecture for Mobile Cloud Computing 
(MCC), a marketplace. Also, Chaos Genetic Algorithm (CGA) is proposed for optimizing the fitness value for 
trusted selection of cloud services by taking into account the mobile user’s trust expectation. This system 
provides means to identify the trustworthy cloud providers in terms of different attributes (e.g., security and 
performance) assessed by multiple sources and roots of trust information. 

KEYWORDS: Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC), Chaos Genetic Algorithm (CGA), Trust-Based Cloudlet Service 
Selection (TCSS), Cloudlet and Service Level Agreements (SLAs). 

1 Introduction 
Mobile cloud computing (MCC) is a new computing model where cloud computing (CC) is 

integrated into mobile computing environments. MCC is derived from cloud computing; thus, it 
inherits the advantages of cloud computing, such as dynamic development of mobile applications, 
resource scalability, multiuser sharing, and multiservice integration. The new computing model 
breaks through the resource limitations of mobile terminals by moving data processing and storage 
from mobile devices to cloud service platforms via wireless networks. Rich mobile applications can 
be easily created and accessed just based on a web browser on mobile devices [1].  

In MCC, computation-intensive tasks can be migrated to the resource-rich cloud nodes so as to 
improve application performance and reduce energy consumption of mobile devices. In order to 
further reduce the cloud access delay, infrastructure-based cloudlet has been introduced, which acts 
as the middle layer between the cloud and mobile users. Since it is deployed near Wi-Fi access points, 
it can provide efficient cloud resources for nearby mobile users with lower latency. A cloudlet is 
located at the edge of the Internet is a mobility-enhanced small-scale cloud data center, which 
extends cloud computing infrastructure [2]. But, quite apart from that, it also has some problems, 
including resource limits, weak battery strength, user mobility, and low network coverage. However, 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



104 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

with the rapidly growing density of mobile devices, such a kind of cloudlet will also face the resource 
limitation challenge. 

In the existence of the MCC, a large number of users of the internet through their digital assistant 
make use of the cloud technology via the wireless interface. The selection of the prompt cloud service 
becomes more trivial and an important issue to be addressed. Personal digital assistants are used for 
many online services that distribute a range of files in the cloud. These get access to the cloud 
environment using any of the technologies, such as 4G, LTE, GPRS, that give rise to different 
challenges, such as bandwidth limitation, cost, capacity to store, and latency.  

In this study, a method that is efficient and more secure mobile cloud computing model based 
on the Cloudlet concept is presented, the mobile device users can connect directly to cloud resources. 
The proposed cloudlet-based model is developed in such a way that it can be used across a range of 
applications where there is a high need for efficiency and security. In which the initial population is 
generated by chaos mapping and refined by competition within each iteration of this approach, in 
addition to the evolution of the genetic algorithm (GA) [4]. 

2 Literature Review 
Naseer et al [5] introduced a model that can help the users of the cloud services (CSUs) in finding 

a service provider (CSPs) that is more efficient and trusted enough based on the data that is gathered 
from the statutory authorities, CSP’s performances, and more from the feedback given by the 
consumers. The model was also customizable as per the changing requirements of the end users, 
based on the level of precedence of the users. The demands that are mostly preferred by the users 
are taken into consideration while developing such a trustworthy model in the service layer of the 
cloud technology.   

Manuel [6] proposed a unique technique that is based on the credentials recorded in the past 
and the current abilities of a service provider. The four parameters, namely the availability, 
reliability, turnaround efficiency, and data integrity, were considered as the key for the calculation of 
the trust value. It depicted how an SLA (Service Level Agreement) is made between the user and the 
provider in terms of the requirements of the user and the abilities of a cloud service provider. The 
results proved that this model outperforms the [5] and other competitive models.  

Saravanan and Vani [7] elucidated a framework shortly termed as SelCSP that makes a 
combination of trust and the level of competence for estimating the risk of interacting for supporting 
the consumers in identifying the best service provider. The measure of trust is calculated from the 
personal experiences that are gained by the one-one interactions or through the feedback that is 
related to the reputation of a service provider. Transparency is the factor that determines the 
competence of an SLA. A case study was also made to present the proposed approach. 

Emeakaroha [8] presented the operationalization of a trust label system designed to 
communicate trust and trustworthiness in Cloud services to improve consumer confidence and trust 
in Cloud providers. It describes the technical details and implementation of the trust label 
components. Based on a use case scenario, an initial evaluation was carried out to test its operations 
and its usefulness for increasing consumer trust in Cloud services.  

Billhardt [9] investigated the problem of vendor selection with the use of trust and the 
techniques based on reputation. Many of them are based on the consumers’ direct experiences they 
had with the application delivered through a vendor. When there is no experience for reference, the 
acquaintances of the consumer are contacted, as they serve as an input for the reputation of a service 
provider. On the contrary, the work urges for an approach that is based on the experience for the 
selection of vendors where the consumers place trust and mechanisms of reputation for the future 
service providers from a situation that is similar.   



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 105 
 

Agheli et al [10] came up with a unique issue from where it was clear that the major obstacle in 
bringing the cloud technology into a wide range of use is the lack of consumers' trust in the vendors. 
The trust creation issue is addressed in this research, and the outcome was a predictive model based 
on the priority of the services that are promised by the vendor and allowing the users to validate and 
choose a suitable platform. Based on the trust model of subjective logics, the research made a 
combination of the experiences, reputation values, satisfied interaction feedback, and risk factors. 

Sharma and Mahrishi [11] put forth a trust-based model that depends on the authorizations that 
were made in the past and on the current competency of a vendor. The value for the trust is based on 
the capability, feedback, and behavior. The results indicate that the proposed model is found to be 
better than the other existing models for building trust in the consumers.  

Khurana and Bawa [12] presented a Quality-Based Cloud Service Broker framework (QCSB) will 
be proposed. This framework will not only help Cloud consumers (CC) to select optimal Cloud service 
providers (CSP) but also rank candidate CSPs according to user preferences mentioned in SLA. 
Subsequent sections will discuss its components, algorithm, and implementation issues. A case study 
on three CSPs with three Quality metrics will be executed using the CloudSim simulator. It is 
envisioned that the present research will benefit all those users who are interested in SLA based 
selection and ranking of CSPs. 

Mangla et al [13] proposed a trust management framework for effective selection of Cloud 
providers to fulfil numerous Cloud users’ requirements reliably. Due to a lack of trust between these 
two stakeholders has delayed the worldwide acceptance of Cloud for outsourced facilities has been 
delayed. The TM framework for effective matching of Cloud facilities to fulfill numerous Cloud users’ 
requirements is presented. Also, an outline is made to compute the trustworthiness of any service 
provider based on the individual perception, collaborative decision, and on the credential 
characteristics of the provider itself. 

Li and Ping [14] investigated the various models of trust that are used in a very large and 
distributed atmosphere and further introduced a unique model for the trust factor for addressing the 
issues in the security of a cloud service, where the consumer is independent in choosing the service 
provider that is heterogeneous and compatible. The proposed model is based on the domain. Here, 
an agent is set for building trust by dividing the resource nodes within the cloud. In this model, the 
recommendations are considered as one of the services in the cloud, similar to a computational 
service or a storage service. The experiments prove that it can build an efficient trustworthiness 
model in a cross-cloud atmosphere. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
In general, MCC is growing rapidly, with new providers will increasingly compete for customers 

by providing services with trust and performance. In this work, we introduced a chaos genetic 
algorithm [15] for optimizing the trust value for selecting a cloud with trustworthy and good 
performance. The selected cloud services for chromosome to calculate the trust value are (i) cloud 
certified by a standard agency, and (ii) cloudlet in the same region considered for trust ranking, and 
(i) power consumption and (ii) response time will be considered for performance ranking. The total 
ranking of service selection of the service provider is calculated by the sum of trust ranking and 
performance ranking. Any requests for the service by a user are forwarded by the mobile network to 
the server in the cloud post the process of validation, confirming the legitimacy of the user. The server 
then processes the request one at a time. The cloudlet scheme is widely used to resolve many issues 
related to the MCC. The cloudlet is a PC that is equipped with the required specifications and is made 
accessible by PDAs in a given area/range. The overall layout of the proposed method is depicted in 
Figure 1. Here, the services are offered from a remote place to the users who are in close distance in 



106 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

a minimum time with a great throughput. The environment with three cloudlets is shown in Figure 
2. 

Cloud user 

Trust evaluation & optimization 
Cloud service directory 

User feedback 
 

Service database and 

Availability, Reliability, Data integrity, service broker 

Turnaround efficiency, Time response, 

etc... 

Optimization using CGA algorithm 

Cloud service provider 

  
   

services services services services services 

 
Figure 1: Overview of proposed methodology 

 
Figure 2: Multi-cloudlet environments near the mobile device 

It can be divided into three parts are layer 1, layer 2, and layer 3. Layer 1 consists of mobile 
devices, layer 2 consists of agent cloudlet, and layer 3 consists of cloud providing Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). Layer 1 consists of the 
mobile devices that place the requests for a service to layer 2, which has the cloudlet. The layer 2 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 107 
 

provides the requested service in return if there is a possibility, else the requests are handed over to 
the actual cloud is present in the layer 3, which gets the requests and sends back the appropriate 
results to the cloudlet, and the results are again transferred to the PDAs in the layer 1. These are the 
common processes that take place in mobile cloud computing generally. The contribution of this 
work will take place between layer 2 and layer 3, based on trust for the selection of a cloudlet is called 
the trust-based service selection model. So, the cloudlet selection based on trust and performance 
will be discussed in the section below. As discussed earlier, trust will be measured by a cloud certified 
by a standard agency and a cloudlet in the same region, and the Performance value will be measured 
in terms of time response, and power consumption will be explained. 

3.1 Service Selection based on Trust value 
Here, the trust service provider will be calculated based on the user’s feedback and service 

provider credentials. Trust Management Service (TMS): In a classic interaction of the TMS that is 
based on the reputation, feedback is given by the end user, or in another case, the user requests the 
assessment of the cloud service in view of the trust. 

3.2 Feedback Collusion Detection 
There are high chances for a great number of false feedbacks performed by a malicious user to 

manipulate the results of the cloud’s trustworthiness. (feedback that is promoting and attacks of 
Slandering). It is suggested by a decent count of researchers to validate the feedback based on its 
count of positivity, but this alone cannot be considered for the determination of the credibility. Either 
feedback or an assessment of the trustworthiness is given by the end user. The behavior in terms of 
the trust of a service offered in the cloud is the collection comprised of the history of invocation, the 
feedback, and this forms the basics of various parameters of the Quality of Service (QoS). This 
happens in-between the service providers and the consumers. The CSPs are contacted, and 
information on the cost, the time complexity, and the type of service is stored; in addition, the users 
get connected with the brokers for the fulfillment of the requirements. 

3.2.1 Cloud certified by a standard agency 
The important cloud certifications by the standard agency of service providers are availability, 

reliability, data integrity, and turnaround efficiency, as given below [1]:  

Availability: 
Availability (AVI) is the degree to which the required services are accessible. Let SPREQUEST and 

SPACCEPTED represent the number of service requests submitted to and accepted by the Service 
Provider over a period of time T. So, the availability can be determined as:  

AVSP= SPACCEPTED/SPREQUEST                                    (1) 

where 0≤ AVSP ≤. As the value of AVSP approaches 1, availability increases. 

Reliability: 
Reliability (RE) of a service provider is measured in terms of the successful completion of service 

requests. Let SERVDELIVERY denote the number of successful service deliveries by service provider over 
a period of time T, then the reliability of service PROVIDER can be determined as: 

RISP = SERVDELIVERY / SPACCEPTED                             (2) 

As the value of RISP approaches 1, reliability increases. 



108 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

Data integrity 
It refers to the security and privacy of data. Let αSP denotes the requests successfully served with 

desired data security by the service provider over a period of time T, then the data integrity of the 
service provider can be determined by using. 

DISP = α / SERVDELIVER                                                        (3) 

Turnaround Efficiency 
Turnaround time is the time elapsed between the submission of the service request to the 

successful service delivery. It is an important parameter incorporated in the SLA between the service 
provider and the Cloud user. Turnaround Efficiency (TE) of the service provider can be evaluated as: 

TESP = (Promised turnaround time for a service in SLA) / (Actual turnaround time for the 
 (4) 

service) 

Let w1, w2, w3, and w4 be the weights associated with AV, RE, DI, and TE, respectively, based on the 
priority of these attributes. The standard agency-based trust of service provider SA(SP) can be 
evaluated as: 

SASP = w1* AVSP + w2* RISP + w3* DISP + w4* TESP    (5) 

Where w1 + w2 + w3 + w4 = 1 
Service selection based on performance analysis consists of delay time and power consumption 

range. 
The Trust Value (TV) of service provider ‘SP’ can be evaluated as: 

𝑇𝑉 = 𝜇1 ∗ 𝐷𝑇𝑆𝑃 + 𝜇2 ∗ 𝑅𝑇𝑆𝑃 + 𝜇3 ∗ SASP  (6) 

Where μ1 + μ2 + μ3 = 1, and these weights are assigned based on the priority. 
Direct Trust: Direct trust (DTsp) between Cloud user (Clu) and Cloud Service provider (SP) is 

computed based on direct interactions. 

𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑄𝑈𝐸𝑆𝑇𝑢

𝐷𝑇𝑆𝑃 ∗ 𝑇𝑑
= {𝑆𝑃 𝑢(𝑡), 𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑄𝑈𝐸𝑆𝑇 ≥ 𝑆𝑃

𝑢 𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐸𝑃𝑇𝐸𝐷𝑢
𝑢 𝑅𝐸𝑄𝑈𝐸𝑆𝑇 + 𝛽𝑆𝑃

𝑢 𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐸𝑃𝑇𝐸𝐷   (7) 
𝑢

0 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒

SPREQUESTu represents the number of successful service delivery cases by the service provider and 
SPACCEPTEDu corresponds to failure due to wrong credentials of the provider or non-attainment of 
specified Quality of Service (QoS) parameters. 𝛽 ≥ 1 is the punishment factor forcing the service 
provider to advertise authentic information. The weightage of user feedback is related to time; the 
longer the time is the less reliable the information available. Let 𝑇𝑑𝑢(𝑡) is a time delay function 
representing the weightage of the uth Cloud user at time ‘t’ then:  

1
𝑇𝑑𝑢(𝑡)  =   (8) 

1 + 𝜃(𝑡 − 𝑡𝑖)

where θ is the time delay speed factor, and ti represents the time when the ith feedback for the 
same provider was given. The cloudlet selection delay ‘θ’ considers the following constraints 

(i) The time delay for the sending of messages to the cloudlets that are nearby (Tsend), 
(ii) The time delay for receiving the responses from the cloudlets that are nearby (Trecv), 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 109 
 

(iii) The time delay for accessing the information of the cloudlet from the table (CIT) (Taccess). 
The cloudlet selection delay is given as: 

𝜃 = (Tsend, Trecv, Taccess) = Tsend + Trecv +Taccess               (9) 

Recommended Trust: Recommended trust (RTSP) for a service provider refers to the trust information 
obtained from other Cloud users who have interacted with the same service provider. It can be 
obtained by taking the average of all Cloud users having experience with the services of service 
provider ‘SP.  

𝑅𝑇𝑆𝑃 ∑𝑛

 𝑖=1 𝐷𝑇𝑆𝑃
= 𝑢    (10) 

𝑛

These are the trust values evaluated for service selection in cloudlet, and to optimize of trust value, 
chaos genetic algorithm is used. 

3.3 Genetic Algorithm (GA) 
GA is widely used in many approaches for the representation of the process of diagnosis. These are 

used for representing and calculating the appropriate fitness for the optimization of the values of the trust 
for selecting a good vendor.  

Genetic Algorithm [16] is a procedure to search that is available globally for the searching 
mechanism from a particular population to another. It is based on probability and is mostly applied to 
problems that are difficult for optimization and learning. These are the ones that can be seen in the natural 
evolution. This is used as an approach for searching globally for the best optimization. When the GAs is 
normally applied to the problem of optimizing, and when the requirement is found to be unsatisfactory, 
there forms a subset is formed that is appropriate. It then requires that the alternatives are to be coded 
in the form of strings of a definite length that have symbols and alphabets. These are termed 
chromosomes, and the symbols that arise out of this are termed genes, and the collection is termed a gene 
pool. The GAs generally searches for a suitable alternative in the sense of a particular fitness function over 
the evolution of the chromosomes. The preliminary steps involved in a GA are depicted in Figure 3. 

GA is based on the biological concept of generating the population. According to Darwin's theory, the 
term “Survival of the Fittest” is used as the method of scheduling in which the tasks are assigned to 
resources according to the value of the fitness function for each parameter of the task scheduling process. 
The main principles of the GA are described as follows:  
3.3.1 Initial Population 

 The initial population is the set of all individuals that are used in the GA to find the optimal solution. 
Every solution in the population is called an individual. Every individual is represented as a chromosome 
to make it suitable for the genetic operations. From the initial population, the individuals are selected, and 
some operations are applied to them to form the next generation. The mating chromosomes are selected 
based on some specific criteria.  
3.3.2 Fitness Function  

The productivity of any individual depends on the fitness value. It is the measure of the superiority 
of an individual in the population. The fitness value shows the performance of an individual in the 
population. Therefore, the individuals survive or die out according to the fitness or function value. Hence, 
the fitness function is the motivating factor in the GA.  
3.3.3 Selection 

 The selection mechanism is used to select a middle solution for the next generation based on 
Darwin's law of survival. This operation is the guiding channel for the GA based on the performance. 



110 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

There are various selection strategies to select the best chromosomes, such as roulette wheel, Boltzmann 
strategy, tournament selection, and selection based on rank. 
3.3.4 Crossover 

 Crossover operation can be achieved by selecting two parent individuals and then creating a new 
individual tree by alternating and reforming the parts of those parents. The hybridization operation is a 
guiding process in the GA, and it boosts the searching mechanism.  

Start 

Population Initialization with Cloud user 

(𝐶𝑙𝑢 ) and Cloud Service provider (𝑆𝑃) 

Evaluate Trust Value (TV) 

Perform Selection for service selection  

Crossover and Mutation 

No  
If iteration<1000 

Yes  

Find best service with higher Trust Value 

(TV) 

End  
 

Figure 3: GA flowchart 

3.3.5 Mutation 
After crossover, mutation takes place. It is the operator that introduces genetic diversity in the population. 
The mutation takes place whenever the population tends to become homogeneous due to repeated use 
of reproduction and crossover operators. It occurs during evolution according to a user-defined mutation 
probability, usually set to a fairly low value. A mutation alters one or more gene values in the chromosome 
from its initial state. This can produce entirely new gene values being added to the gene pool. With these 
new gene values, the genetic algorithm may be able to produce a better solution than previously. 
Traditional GAs usually works well for single optimum problems, but they fail if they have to find multiple 
solutions. So, to overcome this problem, here Chaos GA is used.   

 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 111 
 

3.4 Chaos Theory 
Chaos is a bounded dynamic behavior that occurs in a deterministic nonlinear system. There are 

three main properties of the chaotic map, i.e., Ergodicity, Randomness, and Sensitivity to initial condition. 
The ergodicity property of chaos can ensure chaotic variables to traverse all states non-repeatedly within 
a certain range according to its own laws. So, this can be used as an optimization mechanism that avoids 
falling into a local minimum solution. The sensitivity to the initial state, one of the most important 
characteristics of chaotic systems, can ensure that there are not two identical new populations even if the 
two best-fit solutions obtained by sequential evolving procedures are very close. So, such a population 
not only reserves the best-fit chromosome, but also maintains population diversity. By using these 
properties, an effective approach was proposed for maintaining the population diversity and avoiding the 
search being trapped in a local optimum. In this paper, we use logistic and tent maps to generate the 
chaotic sequence. Chaotic sequences have been proven easy and fast to generate and store; there is no 
need for storage of long sequences. In addition, an enormous number of different sequences can be 
generated simply by changing its initial condition. Moreover, these sequences are deterministic and 
reproducible [15]. 
Logistic Map 

 Is one of the simplest forms of chaotic mappings. Basically, this map is a polynomial mapping of 
degree 2, whose equation is the following: 

Xn+1 = rXn(1-Xn) Xn ∈ (0,1)  (11) 

Where r is a control parameter which is between 0 and 4. 
Tent Map 

 Is one of the known chaotic systems, and it is a discrete-time dynamical system, whose equation is 
the following: 

𝜇𝑥𝑛                    𝑥 1    
𝑛 < 

2
Xn + 1 =  { 1             (12) 

𝜇(1 − 𝑥𝑛)       𝑥𝑛 ≥
2

Where μ is a control parameter when 1< μ< 2, the system exhibits chaotic behavior. 
3.4.1 Chaos Genetic Algorithm 

 Recently, chaos theory and the generation of chaotic sequences instead of random ones have 
been adopted, which has led to very interesting results. GA has aroused intense interest, due to the 
flexibility, versatility, and robustness in solving optimization problems, which conventional 
optimization methods find difficult. One of the major disadvantages of the GA is its premature 
convergence and population initialization, especially when optimization problems have more local 
optima. To solve the initialization population in GA, chaos theory is introduced. The overall 
representation of CGA is shown in Figure 4. In this work, CGA is proposed to combine the concept of 
chaos with GA. By using these properties of chaos, propose a CGA based on two kinds of chaotic 
mapping. In improving the algorithm, use chaotic mapping instead of a random process. The standard 
GA uses random sequences in the initial population, crossover, and mutation. In the GA method, the 
initial population generated by a random approach might be unevenly distributed and away from the 
optimal solution. Hence, the algorithmic efficiency can be very low, and a larger number of iterations 
is needed to find the global optimum. Therefore, use the uniform distribution of the tent map to 
generate the initial population. Then, use the logistic map output instead of crossover and mutation 
each time a random number is needed. The flowchart of the proposed method is shown in Figure 4. 
This proposed methodology for service selection is compared with various existing methods, will be 
detailed discussion on the results and discussion section. 



112 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

 
Figure 4: CGA flowchart 

Input: Number of Service providers and number of users with chromosome: availability, 
reliability, data integrity, Turnaround Efficiency, Direct Trust, Recommended Trust  

Output: Trust-based service selection  

CGCA algorithm 

Step 1: Start  

Step 2: Population Initialization P(i) with Cloud user (Clu ) and Cloud Service provider (SP) 

Step 3: If (i=0 to N) 

        3.1. Evaluate trust value (TV) for each population P(i) 

 3.2. Perform selection operation  

 3.3. Logistic map with crossover 

 3.4. Logistic map with mutation  

Step 4: If (iteration<max iterations) 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 113 
 

Step 5: Select the best cloud service with higher trust  

Step 6: else go to step 2  

Step 7: end 

4 Results and Discussion 
In this section, we are going to compare various existing techniques with the proposed TCSS-

CGA for service selection in cloudlets in terms of trust value, response time, and throughput with 
respect to the number of services. The platform of the simulation environment is CloudSim toolkit, 
which is a simulation platform based on Java, that supports modeling and simulation of large-scale 
cloud computing data centers. Therefore, it is feasible to simulate the proposed model of cloud 
computing environments by CloudSim. Each service provider possesses a set of cloud components, 
and the set sizes of all service providers are uniformly distributed (i.e., from 1 to 10). One or more 
components can be combined to produce a cloud service. Use a simple case study example in this 
section. For this aim, three real cloud services, i.e., Amazon EC2, IBM, and GoGrid, are selected. 
Generate 100 Service Providers and 10000 Cloud Users, and 50 Kinds Of Different Cloud 
Components. The proposed work is tested on some famous benchmark functions, which Table 1 
shows the main properties of the benchmark functions used in the experiments. 

Table 1: Benchmark for simulation 

Function Mathematical function Range 

Zakharov 𝑛 𝑛 2 𝑛 4
(-10,10) 

𝑓(𝑥) = ∑ 𝑥2 + (∑ 0.5𝑖𝑥𝑖) + (∑ 0.5𝑖𝑥𝑖)  
𝑖=1 𝑖=1 𝑖=1

Ackley 𝑛 (-15,15) 
1 1

𝑓(𝑥) = 20 + 𝑒 − 20 exp (−0.2 (√ ) − exp ( (∑ 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2𝜋𝑥𝑖))) 
𝑛(∑𝑛

1 𝑥2 𝑛
𝑖= 𝑖 )

𝑖=1

𝑛−1
Rosenbrock 2 (-20,20) 

𝑓(𝑥) = ∑(100 (𝑥2
𝑖 − 𝑥𝑖+1) + (𝑥𝑖 − 1)2) 

𝑖=1
𝑛−1

Rastrigin (-4.15,4.15) 
𝑓(𝑥) = ∑(𝑥2

𝑖 − 10 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2𝜋𝑥𝑖 + 10) 
𝑖=1

 

10

8

6

4 CGA

GA
2

0
100 200 300 400 500

Generation
 

(a) Fitness value for CGA and GA on the Zakharov benchmark function 

Cost



114 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

14
12
10

8
6 CGA
4

GA
2
0

100 200 300 400 500

Generation

 

(b) Fitness value for CGA and GA on Ackley benchmark function 

18
16
14
12
10

8 CGA
6

GA
4
2
0

100 200 300 400 500

Generation

 

(c) Fitness value for CGA and GA on the Rosenbrock benchmark function 

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2 CGA
1.5 GA

1

0.5

0
100 200 300 400 500

Generation

 
(d) Fitness value for CGA and GA on the Rastrigin benchmark function 

Figure 5 (a,b,c,d): Fitness value for CGA and GA on 4 benchmark functions 

 

Cost Cost Cost



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 115 
 

Figure 5 shows the performance of the CGA and GA for solving four functions. Obviously, the 
convergence speed of CGA is faster than that of basic GA. 

The existing methods are Trust-Based Cloud Service Provider Selection (TBCSPS) and Trust 
Evaluation Selecting Service Provider (TESSP). Figures 6, 7, and 8 show the comparison of trust 
accuracy, response time, and throughput with respect to the number of services. 

TBCSPS TESSP TCSS-CGA
100

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0
40 80 120 160 200

No. of services
 

Figure 6: Comparison of Trust Accuracy vs. Number of Services 

From Figure 6, the proposed TCSS-CGA has a higher trust value when compared to the other two 
existing methods, as shown. The proposed TCSS-CGA has 90% at 160 of number of services as a trust 
value, whereas TBCSPS and TESSP have 72% and 84% as trust values at service number 160, 
respectively. 

TBCSPS TESSP TCSS-CGA
100

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0
40 80 120 160 200

No. of services
 

Figure 7: Comparison of throughput vs. Number of services 

From Figure 7, the proposed TCSS-CGA has a higher throughput when compared to the other 
two existing methods, as shown. The proposed TCSS-CGA has 86% as throughput at service number 
160, whereas TBCSPS and TESSP have 65% and 78% as throughput at service 160, respectively. 

Trust value(%)
Throughput(%)



116 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

TBCSPS TESSP TCSS-CGA

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
40 80 120 160 200

No. of services
 

Figure 8: Comparison of response Time vs. Number of services 

From Figure 8, the proposed TCSS-CGA has a lower response when compared to the other two 
existing methods, as shown. The proposed TCSS-CGA has 350 ms at a number of services 160, 
whereas TBCSPS and TESSP have 570 ms and 455 ms as response time at service number 160, 
respectively. 

Assess the effectiveness of cloudlet service selection methods with Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 
and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), which are defined as: 

𝑝𝑟𝑒
∑        

𝑗,𝑖 |𝑄𝑗,𝑖−𝑄    
𝑗,𝑖 |   

𝑀𝐴𝐸 =   
𝑁 (13) 

𝑝𝑟𝑒 2             
𝑗,𝑖 )

𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 = √∑ (𝑄𝑗,𝑖−𝑄𝑗,𝑖
  

𝑁 (14) 

TBCSPS TESSP TCSS-CGA

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

weights
 

Figure 9: MAE comparison with respect to weights 

Figure 9 shows the MAE comparison results of the proposed TCSS-CGA approach has a lower 
MAE when compared to the other two existing methods. The proposed TCSS-CGA approach provides 

MAE
Response time(ms)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 117 
 

a lower MAE of 0.02698 at a weight value of 1.0, whereas TBCSPS and TESSP have 0.03254 and 
0.02963, respectively. 

TBCSPS TESSP TCSS-CGA

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

Weights
 

Figure 10: RMSE comparison with respect to weights 

Figure 10 shows that the RMSE comparison results of the proposed TCSS-CGA approach have a 
lower RMSE when compared to the other two existing methods. The proposed TCSS-CGA approach 
provides a lower RMSE of 0.05322 at a weight value of 1.0, whereas TBCSPS and TESSP have 0.06125 
and 0.05758, respectively. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this study, a trust-based cloudlet selection would take place for a cloud service provider. 

Various trust evaluations are done by the trust management system, like availability, reliability, data 
integrity, and turnaround efficiency, and performance analysis, like time response and power 
consumption, for the selection of service in a cloudlet. Here, the fitness values are optimized by using 
CGA to improve the performance of the system. Experimentally proven that the proposed TCSS-CGA 
algorithm would give a better performance for a selection of services when compared to all other 
existing methods. In the future, trust evaluation will include offloading. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: P. Jayasheelan; supervision and writing—
review and editing: Swamynathan Ramakrishnan. All authors reviewed the results and approved the 
final version of the manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Dinh HT, Lee C, Niyato D, Wang P. A survey of mobile cloud computing: architecture, applications, and 

approaches. Wirel Commun Mob Comput. 2013;13(18):1587-611. 
2. Babar M, Khan MS, Ali F, Imran M, Shoaib M. Cloudlet computing: recent advances, taxonomy, and 

challenges. IEEE Access. 2021;9:29609-22. 

RMSE



118 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):7 
 

3. Degambur LN, Mungur A, Armoogum S, Pudaruth S. Resource allocation in 4G and 5G networks: A review. 
Int J Commun Netw Inf Secur. 2021;13(3):401-8. 

4. Katoch S, Chauhan SS, Kumar V. A review on genetic algorithm: past, present, and future. Multimed Tools 
Appl. 2021;80(5):8091-126. 

5. Naseer MK, Jabbar S, Zafar I. A novel trust model for selection of Cloud Service Provider. In 2014 World 
Symposium on Computer Applications & Research (WSCAR), 2014 Jan 18, Sousse, Tunisia, 2014, p. 1-6. 

6. Manuel P. A trust model of cloud computing based on Quality of Service. Ann Oper Res. 2015;233(1):281-
92. 

7. SARAVANAN S, VANI P. A FRAMEWORK TO FACILITATE SELECTION OF ENHANCED MULTI CLOUD 
SERVICE PROVIDERS. Int J Emerg Technol Comput Sci Electron. 2016;23(5):75-78. 

8. Emeakaroha VC, Fatema K, van der Werff L, Healy P, Lynn T, Morrison JP. A trust label system for 
communicating trust in cloud services. IEEE Trans Serv Comput. 2016;10(5):689-700. 

9. Billhardt H, Hermoso R, Ossowski S, Centeno R. Trust-based service provider selection in open 
environments. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM symposium on Applied computing, 2007 Mar 11, New York, 
NY, USA, 2007, p. 1375-1380. 

10. Agheli N, Hosseini B, Shojaee A. A trust evaluation model for selecting service provider in cloud 
environment. In 2014 4th International Conference on Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE), 
2014 Oct 29, Mashhad, Iran, 2014, p. 251-255. 

11. Sharma S, Mahrishi M. Implementation of trust model on CloudSim based on service parametric model. In 
2015 IEEE International Conference on Research in Computational Intelligence and Communication 
Networks (ICRCICN), 2015 Nov 20, Kolkata, India, 2015, p. 351-356. 

12. Khurana R, Bawa RK. Quality based cloud service broker for optimal cloud service provider selection. Int J 
Appl Eng Res. 2017;12(18):7962-75. 

13. Mangla M, Deokar S, Akhare R, Gheisari M. A proposed framework for autonomic resource management in 
cloud computing environment. In Autonomic Computing in Cloud Resource Management in Industry 4.0, 
2021 Aug 5, Cham: Springer, 2021, p. 177-193. 

14. Li W, Ping L. Trust model to enhance security and interoperability of cloud environment. In IEEE 
international conference on cloud computing, 2009 Dec 1, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009, p. 69-79. 

15. Snaselova P, Zboril F. Genetic algorithm using theory of chaos. Procedia Comput Sci. 2015;51:316-25. 
16. Sohail A. Genetic algorithms in the fields of artificial intelligence and data sciences. Ann Data Sci. 

2023;10(4):1007-18.