ARTICLE 

Automated MRI-Based Brain Lesion Delineation Using Deep 
Convolutional Neural Models 

K. Dhiyaneshwaran1,* and Shanmugan Joghee2 

1Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Technology and Information Technology, Kongu Arts and Science College, 
India. 
2Professor & Discipline leader - Marketing, School of Business, Horizon University College, Al Jurf, Ajman, United Arab 
Emirates. 
*Corresponding Author: K. Dhiyaneshwaran. Email: dhiyaneskailas@gmail.com  

Received: 21 June 2024; Accepted: 15 September 2024; Published: 30 December 2024 

ABSTRACT: In medical image processing, Brain tumor segmentation plays an important role. Early detection 
of these tumors is highly required to provide Treatment for patients. The patient's life chances are improved 
by the early detection of it. The process of diagnosing brain tumour by physicians is normally carried out using 
a manual way of segmentation. It is a time-consuming and difficult one. To solve these problems, Enhanced 
Convolutional Neural Networks (ECNN) are proposed with loss function optimization by the BAT algorithm for 
an automatic segmentation method. The primary aim is to present optimization-based MRI image 
segmentation. Small kernels allow the design of a deep architecture. It has a positive consequence with respect 
to overfitting, provided the lesser weights are assigned to the network. Skull stripping and image enhancement 
algorithms are used for pre-processing. The experimental result shows better performance when compared 
with the existing methods. The compared parameters are precision, recall, and accuracy. In the future, different 
selection schemes can be adopted to improve the accuracy. 

KEYWORDS: Brain tumor, segmentation, hybrid CNN, BAT algorithm, early detection, pre-processing, 
Standardizing Intensity Scales. 
 

1 Introduction 
Uncontrolled growth of cancer cells causes cancer in any part of the body. There are different 

types of tumors and their characteristics, as well as the treatments, differ in different ways [1]. Brain 
tumors are classified as primary and metastatic brain tumors. They started to grow in the brain and 
will stay in the brain. Later begins as a cancer in any part of the body and will spread to the brain.  

 Diagnosing the tumor in the primary stage can save lives significantly. Planning of treatment 
and intervention by the medical personnel depends on the Accurate segmentation of brain tumors. A 
qualified specialist requires a longer period of time to segment the tumors manually. So, it requires 
automatic segmentation and quantitative analysis of tumors [2].  

High variation of Shape, structure, and location makes this process a challenging task. The 
arrangement of the surrounding normal tissues is changed by the tumor mass effect [3]. Intensity 
inhomogeneity [4] and different intensity ranges among the same sequences and acquisition 
scanners are produced in MRI images. 

 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Gnosis Press. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

 
 



135 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 
 

Diagnosing the tumors in the brain is usually done manually, way of segmentation by the experts. 
It is a time-consuming and difficult one. The major aim of this work is to introduce a new enhanced 
classification model to improve the tumor segmentation results. Enhanced Convolutional Neural 
Networks (ECNN) are introduced to resolve brain tumor segmentation. The BAT algorithm is used 
for automatic segmentation, which utilizes the loss function. Skull stripping and image enhancement 
[5] techniques are used to pre-process the MRI images. By using small kernels, deeper architectures 
are designed. Despite having a positive impact with respect to overfitting, provided the number of 
weights is less in a network [6]. 

2 Literature Review 
Shen et al. [7] extended the traditional fuzzy [21]c-means (FCM) clustering algorithm to form a 

robust segmentation technique. Relative location and features of neighboring pixels define the 
neighborhood attraction, which is used to improve the segmentation performance dramatically. A 
neural network model is used to optimize the degree of attraction. But still, the accuracy of the 
classifier is not enhanced. The superiority of the proposed technique is compared to other FCM-based 
methods via real brain MR images with different noise levels. This is the currently deployed 
segmentation method for MRI images.  

 Kazerooni et al [8] modified the traditional GVF algorithm by applying the multi-scale idea to 
segment the brain tumors in MRI images. Scaled edge maps are used to evolve the active contour. 
Threshold-based edge detector is used to improve the performance of this method. Active contour is 
represented by selecting a B-spline snake. The B-spline snake is selected because of its ability to 
capture corners and its local control. 30% of accuracy improvement is achieved by using this method 
when compared to traditional GVF. Currently focusing on improving the robustness of the algorithm 
in high noise environments, but the detection rate has not improved.  

 Kalavathi and Ilakkiyamuthu [9] implemented a wavelet-based Fuzzy C-means (FCM) 
Clustering algorithm for segmentation. They have used Grey Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) 
feature extraction methods. Jaccard similarity and Dice coefficient values were used in evaluating the 
performance of the method that is currently proposed. Improved segmentation and classification of 
the tumors in the brain are attained using this method.  

 Par meet Knur and Harish Kundra [10] improved the intelligent water drops algorithm in order 
to detect the brain tumors. The IWD algorithm is used to detect brain tumors from the input MRI 
images. The improvement in the intelligent water drops algorithm is based on the SVM classifier. 
Cancer and non-cancer cells from the MRI images are classified by the SVM classifier. The output from 
IWD is fed to the SVM classifier. The performance of this system is detected in MATLAB. It provides 
a 20 % increase in the detection accuracy. The execution time is also reduced to 1.5 seconds. 

 Josephine [11] used the symmetry character of the brain image for segmentation of the Brain 
image. Automatic detection of tumor position and edge is the major goal of this work. Real images 
are used for experimentation. The experimental results show the flexibility and convenience of the 
proposed algorithm. It identifies the tumor region from T1, T2-weighted MRI brain images efficiently. 
The current classification methods are not applied to tumor types such as benign and malignant.  

 Yasmeen Khan and Anshul Bhatia [12] segmented the MRI image into the tumor region and the 
non-tumor region. Segmentation of the tumor area is done by utilizing Active Contour calculation. 
Early preparation is not required in this method. Median filters are used to remove the noise from 
the image. Different parameters are used for assessment and comparison with existing methods. The 
results have proven its efficiency.  

 Chen et al [13] combined fuzzy clustering and MRF to segment the MRI image. Fuzzy clustering 
is done on the original image in order to utilize the gray level information and to eliminate noise 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 136 
 

disturbance. It is also based on the coarse-scale image of multi-scale decomposition. MRF is used to 
improve the integrity of the segmented image and to reduce the noise effect. Maximum a Posteriori 
Markov Random Field (MAP-MRF) is used to integrate the spatial constraints and the gray level 
information. 

3 Proposed Methodology 
The proposed architecture of the brain tumor segmentation is discussed in this section. There 

are two phases of operation: i. pre-processing, ii. Segmentation. Skull stripping and image 
enhancement methods are used in pre-processing. A Hybrid Convolutional Neural Network (HCNN) 
is used for segmentation. Loss function is optimized using the BAT algorithm. Figure 1 shows the 
proposed architecture. 

 

      Lables Loss function 

optimizing using BAT 

TRANING SET MRI Patch Patch        
ECNN 

PREPROCESSIN extraction pre-processing 

G 

Percentils and landmarks Mean and variance Weights 

Patch Patch       ECNN 
TESTING SET MRI 

extraction pre-processing  
PREPROCESSING 

  

Post processing 

 
Figure 1: Overall Architecture of the Proposed Model 

Various techniques for Pre-processing are available for dealing with the MRI images of the brain. 
Here, the MRI images get converted into a grey type of image, which is again smoothed by adjusting 
the contrast. 

3.1 Skull Stripping 
This is one of the popular pre-processing techniques that produces improved results. The 

surroundings of the brain are termed the skull. The Skull stripping is the process of eradicating the 
tissues that are not cerebral. It is difficult to distinguish the non-cerebral and the intracranial tissues 
because of their homogeneity in intensity. This is the major problem of skull stripping. Seed point 
selection is affected by this. To identify the range in which the grey value lies in a particular portion 
of the skull, observations are mandatory. Binary images are constructed using contrast adjustment. 
Crop locations are found in the binary images. The images with their contrasts adjusted are then 
cropped to find the part where the tumor is located in the brain. Cropped contrast adjusted image is 
converted into binary using a low threshold value and also converted into binary image. 



137 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 
 

Morphological operation 'thicken' is applied to this binary image. Region-based binary mask 
extraction is used to extract the brain region [14]. 

3.2 Region-Based Binary Mask Extraction 
Properties of each block that satisfy some criteria are used to perform the Region-based 

extraction. Max-min difference and mean values of the blocks are the most widely used criteria. The 
brain mask is applied to the original MRI data. This produces the brain image with the cortex 
stripped. 

3.3 Image Enhancement 
The resultant images [22] are made suitable for display or further analysis by using Image 

enhancement techniques. It is termed the process in which adjustments are made for a digital image. After 
the process of skull stripping, the cortex of the brain can now be viewed as a unique dark ring that 
surrounds the brain in an MRI image. Image-enhanced methods are used to remove the distinct dark ring 
surrounding the brain tissues. For example, key features are identified by using the noise removal 
process. Morphological operation 'thicken' is applied to the binary image. Mean intensity value and 
standard deviation of all training patches extracted for each sequence after normalization. Patches on 
each sequence are normalized to have zero mean and unit variance. An Enhanced Convolutional Neural 
Network (ECNN) is used to segment the brain image after pre-processing. 

3.4 Construction of the Central-Point-Enhanced Layer  
Feather maps are classified by using the dominant point due to the CNN’s invariant characteristics. 

The results from the segmentation process of CNN might not match the brain tumor category if the feather 
map contains the pixels that belong to other brain parts, which are non-brain categories [15]. 

 
 

Figure 2: Processing of the central-point-enhanced algorithm 

A new layer is constructed for the CNN to solve this problem. Consider the following aspects: 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 138 
 

(1) The layers that are designed freshly have to filter out the pixels that are different from those of 
the tumor, so that the dominant point exists for the prevention of the decision being affected. This layer 
must have the capacity to preserve the exact texture or the characters in the feather map.  

(2) The calculation on the matrix is used for the integration of the new design layer along the 
structure of the CNN. It is basically because of the fact that the GPU’s acceleration, which is involved in the 
process of calculation in a CNN which works the Matrix calculation instead of using the process of 
conditional branching. Figure 2 depicts the algorithm that is a central point enhanced. 

In Figure 2, the layer with an enhanced central point is generated for each input feather map. The 
(CE-Alg) is defined as  

Input: The feather map matrix denoted by m and the difference threshold represented by α 
Output: The mR, which is the result of the feather map matrix.  
Step 1: Get the template of the matrix filtration represented as mA. 
 The difference between an element and the central point is computed using (1) 

𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓(𝑥) = (1 − 𝑒−5(𝑥−𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑒)2
)    (1) 

where x defines an element in matrix m, the central point of matrix m is given by x centre. The value 
of diff approaches 0 as the value of x approaches the central point’s value. The value gets increased with 
the increase in the difference in-between x to the central point. The Matrix of mA is gained using (2), 

 𝑚𝐴 = 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓(𝑚) < 𝑎    (2) 

After the calculation of the diff of all the elements in m, they are compared with the logical ‘<’ 
expression. In the resultant matrix, 0 denotes ‘false’ and 1 denotes ‘true’. The mA matrix is constructed 
using this way. The value ‘0’ corresponds to the high difference from the central point, and the value ‘1’ 
denotes the small difference between the central point. In Figure 2, mA, ‘0’ and ‘1’ represent the grey and 
white colours respectively. 

Step 2: Based on mA, mB, and mC are computed. Diagonal matrix J is constructed with width and 
height equal to the width and height of m:  

0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0

𝐽 = [ ]    (3) 
. . . .
1 0 0 0

mB is obtained as follows, 

𝑚𝑏 = ((𝑚𝑎 − 1`) + (𝑗. 𝑚𝑎 . 𝑗) − 1 + 2) == 0    (4) 

Logical equals comparison is denoted by ‘ = = ’ and the dot product of a matrix is denoted by ‘•’. In 
mB, logical ‘true’ corresponds to ‘1’ and logical ‘false’ corresponds to ‘0’. Once the rotation of the elements 
in mA is done surrounding the central point in mB, the positions that remain ‘0’s are marked with ‘1’, and 
the rest of the elements are marked as ‘0’. The matrix mC is constructed based on mA and mB as, 

𝑚𝑐 = −((𝑗. 𝑚𝑎.  . 𝑗) − 1) − 𝑚𝐵    (5) 

After rotating mA around the central point in mC, the positions with the value equals ‘1’ corresponds 
to positions ‘0’ in mB and marked with ‘1’ all the other elements are marked ‘0’.  

Step 3: mA, mB, and mC are filtered to obtain results t1, t2, and t3, mis-filtered through the mA. The 
values that are retained correspond to the elements that are similar to the central point in a feather map. 



139 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 
 

𝑡1 = 𝑚 × 𝑚𝑎    (6) 

Elements in the matrix are then multiplied separately by the position with the use of ‘×’. Matrix t2 is 
obtained by assigning the value of the central point to obtain the ‘1’ in mB as follows 

𝑡2 = 𝑚𝑏 × 𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑒    (7) 

The Filtration process of m is executed through mC. Filtered results are then rotated surrounding 
the central point. The t3 type of Matrix is attained using (8), 

𝑡3 = 𝑗. (𝑚 × 𝑚𝑐)    (8) 

Step 4: Result matrix is obtained by combing t1, t2, and t3. The resulting feather map matrix mr is 
calculated as follows: 

𝑚𝑟 = 𝑡1 + 𝑡2 + 𝑡3    (9) 

Elements having huge differences as the number of central points in a feather map, are filtered using 
this preceding algorithm. Corresponding positions are filled by pixels that are in the positions of 
symmetry with that of the central point. If one happens to filter the elements that are present in the 
symmetric positions, then the CPV “Central Point Value” is used for filling the element. Processing for the 
CE-L is shown as follows: 

    Processing for CE-L 
Input: Feather map Set S={𝑀1, … . , 𝑀𝑛}, distance threshold α 
Output: Feather map Set R={𝑅1, … . , 𝑅𝑛} 
Begin  
Step 1: 𝑅 = 𝜑 
Step 2: for i in 1:N 
                  𝑅𝑖 = 𝐶𝐸 − 𝑎𝑙𝑔(𝑀𝑖, 𝑎) 
                  𝑅𝑖 = 𝑅 ∪ 𝑅𝑖 
              End for  
Step 3: return R 
End 

CE-Alg processes every input feather map in I. All feather map sets are formed by input and 
output CELs. CE-Alg involves the matrix calculations. This layer can be integrated effectively with a 
CNN structure by using this characteristic. 

3.5 Structure of the CE-CNN 
Figure 3 depicts the primary blocks, the input, process, and the output in a CEL. The brain tumor 

image includes the set of images n whose width is w and height is h. This set of brain images is normalized 
onto the interval [0, 1]. Consider the pixel p with location (x,y). The central point of a square 
neighbourhood region is denoted as p. It is constructed with one pixel. The square region’s width and 
height are L = 2 1 + 1. The image patch is cut from the image based on a neighbourhood square region, 
and it is used to construct the feather map set S = {M1, M2,... .,Mn}. Each set of similar images corresponds 
to one feather map Mi. The input of the CE-CNN is given by S, and it is processed as, 

(1) Central-point-enhanced layer: for all the feather maps inside S, an improved feather map set R 
= {R1, R2,… .,Rn} is constructed using CE-Alg. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 140 
 

(2) Convolutional layer: W no of feature maps are gained through W kernels with sizes of K × K by 
convolution calculation. 

(3) Max-pooling layer: a maximum W input feature maps with each of n × n block is conducted. 
Critical characteristics are obtained by reducing the size of the feather map. 

(4) Flatten layer: The previous layer's output feature maps are reshaped. The neurons obtained as 
output are then changed to gain a one-dimensional vector. 

(5) Fully connected three-layer MLP: This is a multi-layered network that is neural and has all the 
input, hidden, and output layers. The first layer is connected directly to the layer that is flat. The count of 
the neurons present in the hidden layer is double that of the one which is in the output layer.  

The transmission function used here is ReLU. A more complicated and non-linear pattern in samples 
is expressed by the hidden layer. The MLP’s ability to segment input samples is highly influenced by the 
number of neurons in the hidden layer. 

 
Figure 3: Structure, input, and output of the CE-CNN 

A minimum no of nodes present in the hidden layer will lead to the non-adequate expression of 
the neural network, which affects the accuracy of the segmentation.  

Large numbers of nodes will lead to overfitting to training data. That reduces the network’s 
generalization ability. So twice the number of neurons in the output layer is set as the default number 
of nodes in the hidden layer. MLP was capable of expressing the pattern inside the brain tumor test 
samples and refrained from overfitting. The count of the criteria will equal the count of the output 
layers. The transmission function used here is the Softmax. The ability in terms of the pixel in a CNN 
is improved by CE-CNN [16]. In the second section of the CE-CNN, the tiniest kernels (3 × 3 in size) 
are selected in the convolutional layer. The third section of the CE-CNN deals with the max-pooling 
by the selection of the smallest kernel. These two layers are then used to obtain the spatial data. 
Reducing the dimensions of the feather map that is taken as input will help the consequent CE-CNN 
for predicting the sample more efficiently. 

Single-group convolutional/max-pooling layers were required to achieve this objective when 
the input feature map was small. Input feather map set S = {M1, M2,… .,Mn}is processed through these 
five parts to obtain the corresponding brain tumor categories for the pixel p. During the training stage 
for the CE-CNN, each training sample pixel is transformed into a training feather map set.  Each 



141 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 
 

pixel of the image is transformed into the feather map set at the image segmentation stage. The 
category is obtained by the learned segmentation model. The pixel’s category is written into the 
corresponding pixel’s position in the resulting image. The prediction error is computed using a loss 
function like categorical cross-entropy. Once the forward pass is complete, the backpropagation 
begins. This is used to update the weights and biases for error and loss reduction. The BAT 
optimization algorithm is used to optimize the loss function. 

3.6 Novel Bat Optimization Algorithm (NBOA) for Loss Function 
The ECNN output represents the estimated probability of a pixel belonging to a skin tumor. ECNN 

performs a pixel-wise segmentation. The loss function used here is cross-entropy. 
A new Novel Bat Optimization Algorithm (NBOA) is proposed to reduce the errors in the brain 

tumor segmentation. The difference between a non-optimal (obstacle) and an optimal error (prey) is 
decided based on the Echolocation mechanism. It allows them to hunt even in total darkness [17-18]. The 
ability of echolocation of bats in NBOA methods is used to reduce the error SU = SU = {f1, f2,...,fm} from the 
brain tumor image dataset. In NBOA, the echolocation distinctiveness is idealized by the following rules. 
These rules are formed by the reduction of errors by bats [19]: 

Segmentation accuracy is sensed by echolocation by bats. Bats also know the difference between 
higher brain tumor segmentation accuracy (prey/food) and surrounding barriers. 

The velocity, feature position, frequency, loudness, and wavelength of a bat are given by veli, fpi, 
freqmin, A0, and γ. Bats fly randomly to search for improved tumor segmentation accuracy. Depending on 
the closeness of their Segmentation accuracy, wavelength, and emitted pulses are fine-tuned.  

Loudness can fluctuate in many ways. It ranges from a large value A0 to the smallest value Amin. 
For every bat bi, starting feature position fpi, velocity veli, and frequency freqi are initialized. For 

each iteration t, the movement of the virtual bats is specified. This is done by updating their velocity and 
position. They are given by equations (10), (11), and (12) as follows: T defines the maximum number of 
iterations, 

𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑖 = 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛 + (𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛)𝛽    (10) 

𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑡 = 𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑡−1
𝑖 𝑖 + (𝑓𝑝𝑡

𝑖 − 𝑓𝑝∗)𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑖    (11) 

𝑓𝑝𝑡 𝑡
𝑖 = 𝑓𝑝𝑡−1

𝑖 + 𝑣𝑖     (12) 

Random vector β ∈ [0, 1] is drawn from a uniform distribution. Frequency of each bat is defined 
by freqi. Current global optimal error is given by 𝐟𝐩. It is located after comparing all the solutions 
among all n errors at each iteration ‘t’. A random number is created after the error position updating 
of bats. A fuzzy membership function is used for the same. A new error position will be created 
around the current best selected error if the random number is larger than the pulse emission rate 
ri. It is given by (13), 

𝑓𝑝𝑛𝑒𝑤 = 𝑓𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑑+∈ 𝐴𝑡    (13) 

where ∈ [-1,1] is a random number. The average loudness of all the bats at the current iteration 
is given by At. The loudness Ai and f(fpi)<f(fp). Ai, the pulse emission rate ri will be updated, and a 
solution will be accepted if a random number is less than loudness Ai and f(fpi)<f(fp). Ai and ri are 
updated by (14-15), 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 142 
 

𝐴𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝐴𝑡
𝑖 𝑖     (14) 

𝑟𝑡+1 𝑜
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖 [1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝛾𝑡)]    (15) 

where α, γ are constants. The algorithm iterates until the termination criteria are met. In the 
proposed NBOA algorithm, the parameters of the bats, such as β, ∈, Ai, γ, and ri, are tuned via the use 
of a Gaussian fuzzy membership function (GFMF). The Gaussian membership function is usually 
represented as Gaussian(x:μ,σ), where μ, σ represent the mean and standard deviation, 

1 𝑥−𝜇 𝑚
𝐹𝐴(𝑥, 𝜇, 𝜎, 𝑚) = exp [− | | ]    (16) 

2 𝜎

where m belongs to the Fuzzification parameter (m=2). 
Algorithm for Novel Bat Optimization Algorithm (NBOA) 

1. Bat population is initialized fpi( i=1,2,….n) and veli 
2. The pulse frequency freqi at fp is defined  
3. The pulse rates ri along with the loudness Ai are defined 
4. While (t <Max number of iterations)  

  4.1. Generation of fresh solutions by frequency adjustments and update velocities /locations 
and solutions [equations (10) to (12)]  

4.2. if (rand >ri )  
   4.2.1. The optimal error column is selected  
   4.2.2. Local error is generated surrounding the best errors that are selected  
  4.3. end if  

4.4. Generate a new solution by flying randomly  
   4.4.1. if (rand < Ai &f (fpi) < f ( fp*)) //compute Ai via fuzzy membership function. 
   (i) Accept the new solutions 
   (ii) Increase ri and reduce Ai 

4.4.2. end if  
4.5. Rank the bats and find the current best x* 

5. end while 
6. Postprocess results and visualization 

It can be efficiently integrated into the backpropagation during network training. 

4 Results and Discussion 
This section discusses the experimental results of the proposed model. The model is implemented 

using Java. The existing Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) algorithm [20] and proposed Enhanced 
Convolutional Neural Network (ECNN) are compared in terms of precision, recall and accuracy for the 
dataset of the Brain Tumor Segmentation Challenge 2015 database (BRATS 2015), obtaining 
simultaneously the first position for the complete, core, and enhancing regions in Dice Similarity 
Coefficient metric for the Challenge data set. 

 



143 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 
 

4.1 Performance Metrics 

4.1.1 Precision 
Precision refers to the percentage of the relevant results, which is defined as, 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
Precision =     (17) 

𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒

4.1.2 Recall 
Recall refers to the percentage of total relevant results correctly classified by the proposed 

algorithm, which are defined as, 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
Recall =      (18) 

𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒  𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 

4.1.3 Accuracy 
Accuracy is one metric for evaluating classification models. Informally, accuracy is the fraction 

of predictions this model got right. Formally, accuracy has the following definition: 

𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 =     (19) 

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙

88

87

86

85

84

83 CNN

82 ECNN

81

80

79
CNN ECNN

DIFFERENT METHODS 

 
Figure 4: Precision results of different methods 

Figure 4 shows the performance comparison results of the proposed ECNN method and the 
existing CNN methods in terms of Precision. From the results, it is concluded that the proposed ECNN 
model produces higher precision results of 87% whereas the existing CNN method produces only 
82%. 

PRECISION (%)



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 144 
 

91

90

89

88

87

86 CNN

85 ECNN

84

83

82
CNN ECNN

DIFFERENT METHODS 

 
Figure 5: Recall results of different methods 

Figure 5 shows the performance comparison results of the proposed ECNN method and the 
existing CNN methods in terms of Recall. From the results, it is concluded that the proposed ECNN 
model produces higher recall results of 90% whereas the existing CNN method produces only 85%. 

92.5

92

91.5

91

90.5

90
CNN

89.5

89 ECNN

88.5

88

87.5
CNN ECNN

DIFFERENT METHODS 

 
Figure 6: Accuracy results of different methods 

Figure 6 shows the performance comparison results of the proposed ECNN method and the 
existing CNN methods in terms of accuracy. The results indicate that the proposed ECNN model. From 
the results, it is concluded that the proposed ECNN model produces higher accuracy results of 92% 
whereas the existing CNN method produces only 89%. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 
Enhanced Convolutional Neural Networks (ECNN) with loss function optimization by the BAT 

algorithm are used in order to perform segmentation of an MRI image in an automated manner. Tiny 

Accuracy  (%) recall (%)



145 J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 
 

kernels are used to achieve a deep architecture. It has a positive effect against overfitting, given the 
smaller number of weights in the network. Skull stripping and image enhancement algorithms are 
used for pre-processing. The experimental results show better performance when compared with 
the existing methods. The compared parameters are precision, recall, and accuracy. In the future, 
different selection schemes can be adopted to improve the accuracy. 

Acknowledgement: Not applicable. 

Funding Statement: Not applicable. 

Author Contributions: The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Conceptualization, 
methodology and writing—original draft preparation: K. Dhiyaneshwaran; supervision and writing—
review and editing: Shanmugan Joghee. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version 
of the manuscript.  

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present 
study. 

References 
1. Gupta MP, Shringirishi MM, Singh Y. Implementation of brain tumor segmentation in brain mr images 

using k-means clustering and fuzzy c-means algorithm. Int J Comput Appl Technol. 2013;5(1):54-9. 
2. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK, Burger PC, Jouvet A, Scheithauer BW, Kleihues P. Acta 

Neuropathol. 2007;114(2):97-109. 
3. Menze BH, Jakab A, Bauer S, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Farahani K, Kirby J, Burren Y, Porz N, Slotboom J, Wiest R, 

Lanczi L. The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (BRATS). IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 
2014;34(10):1993-2024. 

4. Tustison NJ, Avants BB, Cook PA, Zheng Y, Egan A, Yushkevich PA, Gee JC. N4ITK: improved N3 bias 
correction. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2010;29(6):1310-20. 

5. Balafar MA, Ramli AR, Saripan MI, Mashohor S. Review of brain MRI image segmentation methods. Artif 
Intell Rev. 2010;33(3):261-74. 

6. Ejaz K, Rahim MS, Rehman A, Chaudhry H, Saba T, Ejaz A, Ej CF. Segmentation method for pathological 
brain tumor and accurate detection using MRI. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl. 2018;9(8):394-401. 

7. Shen S, Sandham W, Granat M, Sterr A. MRI fuzzy segmentation of brain tissue using neighborhood 
attraction with neural-network optimization. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2005;9(3):459-67. 

8. Kazerooni AF, Ahmadian A, Serej ND, Rad HS, Saberi H, Yousefi H, Farnia P. Segmentation of brain tumors 
in MRI images using multi-scale gradient vector flow. In 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society; 2011 Aug 30, Boston, MA, USA; 2011. p. 7973-7976. 

9. Kalavathi P, Ilakkiyamuthu R. Feature extraction-based hybrid method for segmentation of brain tumor 
in MRI brain images. Int J Inf Technol Comput Sci. 2017;5:95-100. 

10. Kaur P, Kundra H. Usage of Brain Tumor Segmentation in MRI Images Using Intelligent Water Drops 
Algorithm. Int J Eng Comput Sci. 2017;6(6):21732-6. 

11. Josephine S. Brain tumor MRI image detection and segmentation using genetic algorithm. Int J Eng Comput 
Sci. 2018;6(2). 

12. Khan Y, Bhatia A. Active contour-based segmentation for brain tumor segmentation in MRI. Int J Adv Res 
Electron Commun Eng. 2017;6(11):1165-71. 

13. Chen M, Yan Q, Qin M. A segmentation of brain MRI images utilizing intensity and contextual information 
by Markov random field. Comput Assis Surg. 2017;22(sup1):200-11. 

14. Reddy BV, Reddy PB, Kumar PS, Reddy SS. Developing an approach to brain MRI image preprocessing for 
tumor detection. Int J Res. 2014;1(6):725-31. 

15. Pan X, Zhao J. A central-point-enhanced convolutional neural network for high-resolution remote-sensing 
image classification. Int J Remote Sens. 2017;38(23):6554-81. 

16. Bruna J, Mallat S. Invariant scattering convolution networks. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 
2013;35(8):1872-86. 

17. Yang XS. Bat algorithm for multi-objective optimisation. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput. 2011;3(5):267-74. 



J Comput Intell Decis Sci. 2024;1(1):9 146 
 

18. Yang XS, Hossein Gandomi A. Bat algorithm: a novel approach for global engineering optimization. Eng 
Comput. 2012;29(5):464-83. 

19. Yang XS, He X. Bat algorithm: literature review and applications. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput. 2013;5(3):141-
9. 

20. Pereira S, Pinto A, Alves V, Silva CA. Brain tumor segmentation using convolutional neural networks in 
MRI images. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2016;35(5):1240-51. 

21. Senthil Selvi A, Sukumar R. Removal of salt and pepper noise from images using hybrid filter (HF) and 
fuzzy logic noise detector (FLND). Concurr Comput Pract Exp. 2019;31(12):e 4501. 

22. Senthilselvi A, Sukumar R. A survey on image restoration technique. Int J Emerg Eng Res Technol. 
2014;2(8):123-8.